CHARACTER OF CHARLES BROWN He is to weet a melancholy carle: Thin in the waist, with bushy head of hair As hath the seeded thistle when in parle It holds the Zephyr, ere it sendeth fair Its light balloons into the summer air; Therto his beard had not begun to bloom, No brush had touch'd his chin or razor sheer; No care had touch'd his cheek with mortal doom, But new he was and bright as scarf from Persian loom.
Ne cared he for wine, or half-and-half; Ne cared he for fish or flesh or fowl, And sauces held he worthless as the chaff, He 'sdeigned the swine-head at the wassail-bowl; Ne with lewd ribbalds sat he cheek by jowl, Ne with sly Lemans in the scorner's chair; But after water-brooks this Pilgrim's soul Panted, and all his food was woodland air Though he would oft-times feast on gilliflowers rare.
The slang of cities in no wise he knew, Tipping the wink to him was heathen Greek; He sipp'd no olden Tom or ruin blue, Or nantz or cherry-brandy drank full meek By many a damsel hoarse and rouge of cheek; Nor did he know each aged watchman's beat, Nor in obscured purlieus would he seek For curled Jewesses with ankles neat, Who as they walk abroad make tinkling with their feet.
THE DAY IS GONE, AND ALL ITS SWEETS ARE GONE!
The day is gone, and all its sweets are gone!
Sweet voice, sweet lips, soft hand, and softer breast, Warm breath, light whisper, tender semi-tone, Bright eyes, accomplish'd shape, and lang'rous waist!
Faded the flower and all its budded charms, Faded the sight of beauty from my eyes, Faded the shape of beauty from my arms, Faded the voice, warmth, whiteness, paradise- Vanish'd unseasonably at shut of eve, When the dusk holiday or holinight Of fragrant-curtain'd love begins to weave The woof of darkness thick, for hid delight; But, as I've read love's missal through to-day, He'll let me sleep, seeing I fast and pray.
DEDICATION [OF POEMS, 1817] TO LEIGH HUNT, ESQ.
Glory and loveliness have pass'd away; For if we wander out in early morn, No wreathed incense do we see upborne Into the east, to meet the smiling day: No crowd of nymphs soft voic'd and young, and gay, In woven baskets bringing ears of corn, Roses, and pinks, and violets, to adorn The shrine of Flora in her early May.
But there are left delights as high as these, And I shall ever bless my destiny, That in a time, when under pleasant trees Pan is no longer sought, I feel a free, A leafy luxury, seeing I could please With these poor offerings, a man like thee.
ENDYMION: A POETIC ROMANCE PREFACE "The stretched metre of an antique song" INSCRIBED TO THE MEMORY OF THOMAS CHATTERTON PREFACE KNOWING within myself the manner in which this Poem has been produced, it is not without a feeling of regret that I make it public.
What manner I mean, will be quite clear to the reader, who must soon perceive great inexperience, immaturity, and every error denoting a feverish attempt, rather than a deed accomplished.
The two first books, and indeed the two last, I feel sensible are not of such completion as to warrant their passing the press; nor should they if I thought a year's castigation would do them any good;- it will not: the foundations are too sandy.
It is just that this youngster should die away: a sad thought for me, if I had not some hope that while it is dwindling I may be plotting, and fitting myself for verses fit to live.
This may be speaking too presumptuously, and may deserve a punishment: but no feeling man will be forward to inflict it: he will leave me alone, with the conviction that there is not fiercer hell than the failure in a great object.
This is not written with the least atom of purpose to forestall criticisms of course, but from the desire I have to conciliate men who are competent to look, and who do look witha zealous eye, to the honour of English literature.
The imagination of a boy is healthy, and the mature imagination of a man is healthy; but there is a space of life between, in which the soul is in a ferment, the character undecided, the way of life uncertain, the ambition thick-sighted: thence proceeds mawkishness, and all the thousand bitters which those men I speak of must necessarily taste in going over the following pages.
I hope I have not in too late a day touched the beautiful mythology of Greece and dulled its brightness: for I wish to try once more, before I bid it farewell.
TEIGNMOUTH, April 10, 1818 BOOK I.
A thing of beauty is a joy for ever: Its loveliness increases; it will never Pass into nothingness; but still will keep A bower quiet for us, and a sleep Full of sweet dreams, and health, and quiet breathing.
Therefore, on every morrow, are we wreathing A flowery band to bind us to the earth, Spite of despondence, of the inhuman dearth Of noble natures, of the gloomy days, Of all the unhealthy and o'er-darkened ways Made for our searching: yes, in spite of all, Some shape of beauty moves away the pall From our dark spirits.
Such the sun, the moon, Trees old, and young, sprouting a shady boon For simple sheep; and such are daffodils With the green world they live in; and clear rills That for themselves a cooling covert make 'Gainst the hot season; the mid forest brake, Rich with a sprinkling of fair musk-rose blooms: And such too is the grandeur of the dooms We have imagined for the mighty dead; All lovely tales that we have heard or read: An endless fountain of immortal drink, Pouring unto us from the heaven's brink.
Nor do we merely feel these essences For one short hour; no, even as the trees That whisper round a temple become soon Dear as the temple's self, so does the moon, The passion poesy, glories infinite, Haunt us till they become a cheering light Unto our souls, and bound to us so fast, That, whether there be shine, or gloom o'ercast, They alway must be with us, or we die.
Therefore, 'tis with full happiness that I Will trace the story of Endymion.
The very music of the name has gone Into my being, and each pleasant scene Is growing fresh before me as the green Of our own vallies: so I will begin Now while I cannot hear the city's din; Now while the early budders are just new, And run in mazes of the youngest hue About old forests; while the willow trails Its delicate amber; and the dairy pails Bring home increase of milk.
And, as the year Grows lush in juicy stalks, I'll smoothly steer My little boat, for many quiet hours, With streams that deepen freshly into bowers.
Many and many a verse I hope to write, Before the daisies, vermeil rimm'd and white, Hide in deep herbage; and ere yet the bees Hum about globes of clover and sweet peas, I must be near the middle of my story.
O may no wintry season, bare and hoary, See it half finish'd: but let Autumn bold, With universal tinge of sober gold, Be all about me when I make an end.
And now at once, adventuresome, I send My herald thought into a wilderness: There let its trumpet blow, and quickly dress My uncertain path with green, that I may speed Easily onward, thorough flowers and weed.
Upon the sides of Latmos was outspread A mighty forest; for the moist earth fed So plenteously all weed-hidden roots Into o'er-hanging boughs, and precious fruits.
And it had gloomy shades, sequestered deep, Where no man went; and if from shepherd's keep A lamb stray'd far a-down those inmost glens, Never again saw he the happy pens Whither his brethren, bleating with content, Over the hills at every nightfall went.
Among the shepherds, 'twas believed ever, That not one fleecy lamb which thus did sever From the white flock, but pass'd unworried By angry wolf, or pard with prying head, Until it came to some unfooted plains Where fed the herds of Pan: aye great his gains Who thus one lamb did lose.
Paths there were many, Winding through palmy fern, and rushes fenny, And ivy banks; all leading pleasantly To a wide lawn, whence one could only see Stems thronging all around between the swell Of turf and slanting branches: who could tell The freshness of the space of heaven above, Edg'd round with dark tree tops?
through which a dove Would often beat its wings, and often too A little cloud would move across the blue.
Full in the middle of this pleasantness There stood a marble altar, with a tress Of flowers budded newly; and the dew Had taken fairy phantasies to strew Daisies upon the sacred sward last eve, And so the dawned light in pomp receive.
For 'twas the morn: Apollo's upward fire Made every eastern cloud a silvery pyre Of brightness so unsullied, that therein A melancholy spirit well might win Oblivion, and melt out his essence fine Into the winds: rain-scented eglantine Gave temperate sweets to that well-wooing sun; The lark was lost in him; cold springs had run To warm their chilliest bubbles in the grass; Man's voice was on the mountains; and the mass Of nature's lives and wonders puls'd tenfold, To feel this sun-rise and its glories old.
Now while the silent workings of the dawn Were busiest, into that self-same lawn All suddenly, with joyful cries, there sped A troop of little children garlanded; Who gathering round the altar, seem'd to pry Earnestly round as wishing to espy Some folk of holiday: nor had they waited For many moments, ere their ears were sated With a faint breath of music, which ev'n then Fill'd out its voice, and died away again.
Within a little space again it gave Its airy swellings, with a gentle wave, To light-hung leaves, in smoothest echoes breaking Through copse-clad vallies,- ere their death, o'ertaking The surgy murmurs of the lonely sea.
And now, as deep into the wood as we Might mark a lynx's eye, there glimmered light Fair faces and a rush of garments white, Plainer and plainer showing, till at last Into the widest alley they all past, Making directly for the woodland altar.
O kindly muse!
let not my weak tongue faulter In telling of this goodly company, Of their old piety, and of their glee: But let a portion of ethereal dew Fall on my head, and presently unmew My soul; that I may dare, in wayfaring, To stammer where old Chaucer us'd to sing.
Leading the way, young damsels danced along, Bearing the burden of a shepherd song; Each having a white wicker over brimm'd With April's tender younglings: next, well trimm'd, A crowd of shepherds with as sunburnt looks As may be read of in Arcadian books; Such as sat listening round Apollo's pipe, When the great deity, for earth too ripe, Let his divinity o'erflowing die In music, through the vales of Thessaly: Some idly trail'd their sheep-hooks on the ground, And some kept up a shrilly mellow sound With ebon-tipped flutes: close after these, Now coming from beneath the forest trees, A venerable priest full soberly, Begirt with ministring looks: alway his eye Stedfast upon the matted turf he kept, And after him his sacred vestments swept.
From his right hand there swung a vase, milk-white, Of mingled wine, out-sparkling generous light; And in his left he held a basket full Of all sweet herbs that searching eye could cull: Wild thyme, and valley-lillies whiter still Than Leda's love, and cresses from the rill.
His aged head, crowned with beechen wreath, Seem'd like a poll of ivy in the teeth Of winter hoar.
Then came another crowd Of shepherds, lifting in due time aloud Their share of the ditty.
After them appear'd, Up-followed by a multitude that rear'd Their voices to the clouds, a fair wrought car, Easily rolling so as scarce to mar The freedom of three steeds of dapple brown: Who stood therein did seem of great renown Among the throng.
His youth was fully blown, Showing like Ganymede to manhood grown; And, for those simple times, his garments were A chieftain king's: beneath his breast, half bare, Was hung a silver bugle, and between His nervy knees there lay a boar-spear keen.
A smile was on his countenance; he seem'd, To common lookers on, like one who dream'd Of idleness in groves Elysian: But there were some who feelingly could scan A lurking trouble in his nether lip, And see that oftentimes the reins would slip Through his forgotten hands: then would they sigh, And think of yellow leaves, of owlets' cry, Of logs piled solemnly.- Ah, well-a-day, Why should our young Endymion pine away!
Soon the assembly, in a circle rang'd, Stood silent round the shrine: each look was chang'd To sudden veneration: women meek Beckon'd their sons to silence; while each cheek Of virgin bloom paled gently for slight fear.
Endymion too, without a forest peer, Stood, wan, and pale, and with an awed face, Among his brothers of the mountain chace.
In midst of all, the venerable priest Eyed them with joy from greatest to the least, And, after lifting up his aged hands, Thus spake he: "Men of Latmos!
shepherd bands!
Whose care it is to guard a thousand flocks: Whether descended from beneath the rocks That overtop your mountains; whether come From vallies where the pipe is never dumb; Or from your swelling downs, where sweet air stirs Blue hare-bells lightly, and where prickly furze Buds lavish gold; or ye, whose precious charge Nibble their fill at ocean's very marge, Whose mellow reeds are touch'd with sounds forlorn By the dim echoes of old Triton's horn: Mothers and wives!
who day by day prepare The scrip, with needments, for the mountain air; And all ye gentle girls who foster up Udderless lambs, and in a little cup Will put choice honey for a favoured youth: Yea, every one attend!
for in good truth Our vows are wanting to our great god Pan.
Are not our lowing heifers sleeker than Night-swollen mushrooms?
Are not our wide plains Speckled with countless fleeces?
Have not rains Green'd over April's lap?
No howling sad Sickens our fearful ewes; and we have had Great bounty from Endymion our lord.
The earth is glad: the merry lark has pour'd His early song against yon breezy sky, That spreads so clear o'er our solemnity."
Thus ending, on the shrine he heap'd a spire Of teeming sweets, enkindling sacred fire; Anon he stain'd the thick and spongy sod With wine, in honour of the shepherd-god.
Now while the earth was drinking it, and while Bay leaves were crackling in the fragrant pile, And gummy frankincense was sparkling bright 'Neath smothering parsley, and a hazy light Spread greyly eastward, thus a chorus sang: "O thou, whose mighty palace roof doth hang From jagged trunks, and overshadoweth Eternal whispers, glooms, the birth, life, death Of unseen flowers in heavy peacefulness; Who lov'st to see the hamadryads dress Their ruffled locks where meeting hazels darken; And through whole solemn hours dost sit, and hearken The dreary melody of bedded reeds- In desolate places, where dank moisture breeds The pipy hemlock to strange overgrowth; Bethinking thee, how melancholy loth Thou wast to lose fair Syrinx- do thou now, By thy love's milky brow!
By all the trembling mazes that she ran, Hear us, great Pan!
"O thou, for whose soul-soothing quiet, turtles Passion their voices cooingly 'mong myrtles, What time thou wanderest at eventide Through sunny meadows, that outskirt the side Of thine enmossed realms: O thou, to whom Broad leaved fig trees even now foredoom Their ripen'd fruitage; yellow girted bees Their golden honeycombs; our village leas Their fairest blossom'd beans and poppied corn; The chuckling linnet its five young unborn, To sing for thee; low creeping strawberries Their summer coolness; pent up butterflies Their freckled wings; yea, the fresh budding year All its completions- be quickly near, By every wind that nods the mountain pine, O forester divine!
"Thou, to whom every faun and satyr flies For willing service; whether to surprise The squatted hare while in half sleeping fit; Or upward ragged precipices flit To save poor lambkins from the eagle's maw; Or by mysterious enticement draw Bewildered shepherds to their path again; Or to tread breathless round the frothy main, And gather up all fancifullest shells For thee to tumble into Naiads' cells, And, being hidden, laugh at their out-peeping; Or to delight thee with fantastic leaping, The while they pelt each other on the crown With silvery oak apples, and fir cones brown- By all the echoes that about thee ring, Hear us, O satyr king!
"O Hearkener to the loud clapping shears While ever and anon to his shorn peers A ram goes bleating: Winder of the horn, When snouted wild-boars routing tender corn Anger our huntsmen: Breather round our farms, To keep off mildews, and all weather harms: Strange ministrant of undescribed sounds, That come a swooning over hollow grounds, And wither drearily on barren moors: Dread opener of the mysterious doors Leading to universal knowledge- see, Great son of Dryope, The many that are come to pay their vows With leaves about their brows!
"Be still the unimaginable lodge For solitary thinkings; such as dodge Conception to the very bourne of heaven, Then leave the naked brain: be still the leaven, That spreading in this dull and clodded earth Gives it a touch ethereal- a new birth: Be still a symbol of immensity; A firmament reflected in a sea; An element filling the space between; An unknown- but no more: we humbly screen With uplift hands our foreheads, lowly bending, And giving out a shout most heaven rending, Conjure thee to receive our humble Paean, Upon thy Mount Lycean!"
Even while they brought the burden to a close, A shout from the whole multitude arose, That lingered in the air like dying rolls Of abrupt thunder, when Ionian shoals Of dolphins bob their noses through the brine.
Meantime, on shady levels, mossy fine, Young companies nimbly began dancing To the swift treble pipe, and humming string.
Aye, those fair living forms swam heavenly To tunes forgotten- out of memory: Fair creatures!
whose young children's children bred Thermopylae its heroes- not yet dead, But in old marbles ever beautiful.
High genitors, unconscious did they cull Time's sweet first-fruits- they danc'd to weariness, And then in quiet circles did they press The hillock turf, and caught the latter end Of some strange history, potent to send A young mind from its bodily tenement.
Or they might watch the quoit-pitchers, intent On either side; pitying the sad death Of Hyacinthus, when the cruel breath Of Zephyr slew him,- Zephyr penitent, Who now, ere Phoebus mounts the firmament, Fondles the flower amid the sobbing rain.
The archers too, upon a wider plain, Beside the feathery whizzing of the shaft, And the dull twanging bowstring, and the raft Branch down sweeping from a tall ash top, Call'd up a thousand thoughts to envelope Those who would watch.
Perhaps, the trembling knee And frantic gape of lonely Niobe, Poor, lonely Niobe!
when her lovely young Were dead and gone, and her caressing tongue Lay a lost thing upon her paly lip, And very, very deadliness did nip Her motherly cheeks.
Arous'd from this sad mood By one, who at a distance loud halloo'd, Uplifting his strong bow into the air, Many might after brighter visions stare: After the Argonauts, in blind amaze Tossing about on Neptune's restless ways, Until, from the horizon's vaulted side, There shot a golden splendour far and wide, Spangling those million poutings of the brine With quivering ore: 'twas even an awful shine From the exaltation of Apollo's bow; A heavenly beacon in their dreary woe.
Who thus were ripe for high contemplating, Might turn their steps towards the sober ring Where sat Endymion and the aged priest 'Mong shepherds gone in eld, whose looks increas'd The silvery setting of their mortal star.
There they discours'd upon the fragile bar That keeps us from our homes ethereal; And what our duties there: to nightly call Vesper, the beauty-crest of summer weather; To summon all the downiest clouds together For the sun's purple couch; to emulate In ministring the potent rule of fate With speed of fire-tail'd exhalations; To tint her pallid cheek with bloom, who cons Sweet poesy by moonlight: besides these, A world of other unguess'd offices.
Anon they wander'd, by divine converse, Into Elysium; vieing to rehearse Each one his own anticipated bliss.
One felt heart-certain that he could not miss His quick gone love, among fair blossom'd boughs, Where every zephyr-sigh pouts, and endows Her lips with music for the welcoming.
Another wish'd, mid that eternal spring, To meet his rosy child, with feathery sails, Sweeping, eye-earnestly, through almond vales: Who, suddenly, should stoop through the smooth wind, And with the balmiest leaves his temples bind; And, ever after, through those regions be His messenger, his little Mercury.
Some were athirst in soul to see again Their fellow huntsmen o'er the wide champaign In times long past; to sit with them, and talk Of all the chances in their earthly walk; Comparing, joyfully, their plenteous stores Of happiness, to when upon the moors, Benighted, close they huddled from the cold, And shar'd their famish'd scrips.
Thus all out-told Their fond imaginations,- saving him Whose eyelids curtain'd up their jewels dim, Endymion: yet hourly had he striven To hide the cankering venom, that had riven His fainting recollections.
Now indeed His senses had swoon'd off: he did not heed The sudden silence, or the whispers low, Or the old eyes dissolving at his woe, Or anxious calls, or close of trembling palms, Or maiden's sigh, that grief itself embalms: But in the self-same fixed trance he kept, Like one who on the earth had never stept.
Aye, even as dead still as a marble man, Frozen in that old tale Arabian.
Who whispers him so pantingly and close?
Peona, his sweet sister: of all those, His friends, the dearest.
Hushing signs she made, And breath'd a sister's sorrow to persuade A yielding up, a cradling on her care.
Her eloquence did breathe away the curse: She led him, like some midnight spirit nurse Of happy changes in emphatic dreams, Along a path between two little streams,- Guarding his forehead, with her round elbow, From low-grown branches, and his footsteps slow From stumbling over stumps and hillocks small; Until they came to where these streamlets fall, With mingled bubblings and a gentle rush, Into a river, clear, brimful, and flush With crystal mocking of the trees and sky.
A little shallop, floating there hard by, Pointed its beak over the fringed bank; And soon it lightly dipt, and rose, and sank, And dipt again, with the young couple's weight,- Peona guiding, through the water straight, Towards a bowery island opposite; Which gaining presently, she steered light Into a shady, fresh, and ripply cove, Where nested was an arbour, overwove By many a summer's silent fingering; To whose cool bosom she was used to bring Her playmates, with their needle broidery, And minstrel memories of times gone by.
So she was gently glad to see him laid Under her favourite bower's quiet shade, On her own couch, new made of flower leaves, Dried carefully on the cooler side of sheaves When last the sun his autumn tresses shook, And the tann'd harvesters rich armfuls took.
Soon was he quieted to slumbrous rest: But, ere it crept upon him, he had prest Peona's busy hand against his lips, And still, a sleeping, held her finger-tips In tender pressure.
And as a willow keeps A patient watch over the stream that creeps Windingly by it, so the quiet maid Held her in peace: so that a whispering blade Of grass, a wailful gnat, a bee bustling Down in the blue-bells, or a wren light rustling Among sere leaves and twigs, might all be heard.
O magic sleep!
O comfortable bird, That broodest o'er the troubled sea of the mind Till it is hush'd and smooth!
O unconfin'd Restraint!
imprisoned liberty!
great key To golden palaces, strange minstrelsy, Fountains grotesque, new trees, bespangled caves, Echoing grottos, full of tumbling waves And moonlight; aye, to all the mazy world Of silvery enchantment!- who, upfurl'd Beneath thy drowsy wing a triple hour, But renovates and lives?- Thus, in the bower, Endymion was calm'd to life again.
Opening his eyelids with a healthier brain, He said: "I feel this thine endearing love All through my bosom: thou art as a dove Trembling its closed eyes and sleeked wings About me; and the pearliest dew not brings Such morning incense from the fields of May, As do those brighter drops that twinkling stray From those kind eyes,- the very home and haunt Of sisterly affection.
Can I want Aught else, aught nearer heaven, than such tears?
Yet dry them up, in bidding hence all fears That, any longer, I will pass my days Alone and sad.
No, I will once more raise My voice upon the mountain-heights; once more Make my horn parley from their foreheads hoar: Again my trooping hounds their tongues shall loll Around the breathed boar: again I'll poll The fair-grown yew tree, for a chosen bow: And, when the pleasant sun is setting low, Again I'll linger in a sloping mead To hear the speckled thrushes, and see feed Our idle sheep.
So be thou cheered, sweet, And, if thy lute is here, softly intreat My soul to keep in its resolved course."
Hereat Peona, in their silver source, Shut her pure sorrow drops with glad exclaim, And took a lute, from which there pulsing came A lively prelude, fashioning the way In which her voice should wander.
'Twas a lay More subtle cadenced, more forest wild Than Dryope's lone lulling of her child; And nothing since has floated in the air So mournful strange.
Surely some influence rare Went, spiritual, through the damsel's hand; For still, with Delphic emphasis, she spann'd The quick invisible strings, even though she saw Endymion's spirit melt away and thaw Before the deep intoxication.
But soon she came, with sudden burst, upon Her self-possession- swung the lute aside, And earnestly said: "Brother, 'tis vain to hide That thou dost know of things mysterious, Immortal, starry; such alone could thus Weigh down thy nature.
Hast thou sinn'd in aught Offensive to the heavenly power?
Caught A Paphian dove upon a message sent?
Thy deathful bow against some deer-herd bent Sacred to Dian?
Haply, thou hast seen Her naked limbs among the alders green; And that, alas!
is death.
No, I can trace Something more high perplexing in thy face!"
Endymion look'd at her, and press'd her hand, And said, "Art thou so pale, who wast so bland And merry in our meadows?
How is this?
Tell me thine ailment: tell me all amiss!- Ah!
thou hast been unhappy at the change Wrought suddenly in me.
What indeed more strange?
Or more complete to overwhelm surmise?
Ambition is so sluggard; 'tis no prize, That toiling years would put within my grasp, That I have sighed for: with so deadly gasp No man e'er panted for a mortal love.
So all have set my heavier grief above These things which happen.
Rightly have they done: I, who still saw the horizontal sun Heave his broad shoulder o'er the edge of the world, Out-facing Lucifer, and then had hurl'd My spear aloft, as signal for the chace- I, who, for very sport of heart, would race With my own steed from Araby; pluck down A vulture from his towery perching; frown A lion into growling, loth retire- To lose, at once, all my toil-breeding fire, And sink thus low!
but I will ease my breast Of secret grief, here in this bowery nest.
"This river does not see the naked sky, Till it begins to progress silverly Around the western border of the wood, Whence, from a certain spot, its winding flood Seems at the distance like a crescent moon: And in that nook, the very pride of June, Had I been used to pass my weary eves; The rather for the sun unwilling leaves So dear a picture of his sovereign power, And I could witness his most kingly hour, When he doth tighten up the golden reins, And paces leisurely down amber plains His snorting four.
Now when his chariot last Its beams against the zodiac-lion cast, There blossom'd suddenly a magic bed Of sacred ditamy, and poppies red: At which I wondered greatly, knowing well That but one night had wrought this flowery spell; And, sitting down close by, began to muse What it might mean.
Perhaps, thought I, Morpheus, In passing here, his owlet pinions shook; Or, it may be, ere matron Night uptook Her ebon urn, young Mercury, by stealth, Had dipt his rod in it: such garland wealth Came not by common growth.
Thus on I thought, Until my head was dizzy and distraught.
Moreover, through the dancing poppies stole A breeze, most softly lulling to my soul; And shaping visions all about my sight Of colours, wings, and bursts of spangly light; The which became more strange, and strange, and dim, And then were gulph'd in a tumultuous swim: And then I fell asleep.
Ah, can I tell The enchantment that afterwards befel?
Yet it was but a dream: yet such a dream That never tongue, although it overteem With mellow utterance, like a cavern spring, Could figure out and to conception bring All I beheld and felt.
Methought I lay Watching the zenith, where the milky way Among the stars in virgin splendour pours; And travelling my eye, until the doors Of heaven appear'd to open for my flight, I became loth and fearful to alight From such high soaring by a downward glance: So kept me stedfast in that airy trance, Spreading imaginary pinions wide.
When, presently, the stars began to glide, And faint away, before my eager view: At which I sigh'd that I could not pursue, And dropt my vision to the horizon's verge; And lo!
from opening clouds, I saw emerge The loveliest moon, that ever silver'd o'er A shell for Neptune's goblet: she did soar So passionately bright, my dazzled soul Commingling with her argent spheres did roll Through clear and cloudy, even when she went At last into a dark and vapoury tent- Whereat, methought, the lidless-eyed train Of planets all were in the blue again.
To commune with those orbs, once more I rais'd My sight right upward: but it was quite dazed By a bright something, sailing down apace, Making me quickly veil my eyes and face: Again I look'd, and, O ye deities, Who from Olympus watch our destinies!
Whence that completed form of all completeness?
Whence came that high perfection of all sweetness?
Speak, stubborn earth, and tell me where, O where Hast thou a symbol of her golden hair?
Not oat-sheaves drooping in the western sun; Not- thy soft hand, fair sister!
let me shun Such follying before thee- yet she had, Indeed, locks bright enough to make me mad; And they were simply gordian'd up and braided, Leaving, in naked comeliness, unshaded, Her pearl round ears, white neck, and orbed brow; The which were blended in, I know not how, With such a paradise of lips and eyes, Blush-tinted cheeks, half smiles, and faintest sighs, That, when I think thereon, my spirit clings And plays about its fancy, till the stings Of human neighbourhood envenom all.
Unto what awful power shall I call?
To what high fane?- Ah!
see her hovering feet, More bluely vein'd, more soft, more whitely sweet Than those of sea-born Venus, when she rose From out her cradle shell.
The wind out-blows Her scarf into a fluttering pavillion; 'Tis blue, and over-spangled with a million Of little eyes, as though thou wert to shed, Over the darkest, lushest blue-bell bed, Handfuls of daisies."- "Endymion, how strange!
Dream within dream!"- "She took an airy range, And then, towards me, like a very maid, Came blushing, waning, willing, and afraid, And press'd me by the hand: Ah!
'twas too much; Methought I fainted at the charmed touch, Yet held my recollections, even as one Who dives three fathoms where the waters run Gurgling in beds of coral: for anon, I felt upmounted in that region Where falling stars dart their artillery forth, And eagles struggle with the buffeting north That balances the heavy meteor-stone;- Felt too, I was not fearful, nor alone, But lapp'd and lull'd along the dangerous sky.
Soon, as it seem'd, we left our journeying high, And straightway into frightful eddies swoop'd; Such as aye muster where grey time has scoop'd Huge dens and caverns in a mountain's side; There hollow sounds arous'd me, and I sigh'd To faint once more by looking on my bliss- I was distracted; madly did I kiss The wooing arms which held me, and did give My eyes at once to death: but 'twas to live, To take in draughts of life from the gold fount Of kind and passionate looks; to count, and count The moments, by some greedy help that seem'd A second self, that each might be redeem'd And plunder'd of its load of blessedness.
Ah, desperate mortal!
I e'en dar'd to press Her very cheek against my crowned lip, And, at that moment, felt my body dip Into a warmer air: a moment more, Our feet were soft in flowers.
There was store Of newest joys upon that alp.
Sometimes A scent of violets, and blossoming limes, Loiter'd around us; then of honey cells, Made delicate from all white-flower bells; And once, above the edges of our nest, An arch face peep'd,- an Oread as I guess'd.
"Why did I dream that sleep o'er-power'd me In midst of all this heaven?
Why not see, Far off, the shadows of his pinions dark, And stare them from me?
But no, like a spark That needs must die, although its little beam Reflects upon a diamond, my sweet dream Fell into nothing- into stupid sleep.
And so it was, until a gentle creep, A careful moving caught my waking ears, And up I started: Ah!
my sighs, my tears, My clenched hands:- for lo!
the poppies hung Dew-dabbled on their stalks, the ouzel sung A heavy ditty, and the sullen day Had chidden herald Hesperus away, With leaden looks: the solitary breeze Bluster'd, and slept, and its wild self did teaze With wayward melancholy; and I thought, Mark me, Peona!
that sometimes it brought Faint fare-thee-wells, and sigh-shrilled adieus!- Away I wander'd- all the pleasant hues Of heaven and earth had faded: deepest shades Were deepest dungeons; heaths and sunny glades Were full of pestilent light; our taintless rills Seem'd sooty, and o'er-spread with upturn'd gills Of dying fish; the vermeil rose had blown In frightful scarlet, and its thorns out-grown Like spiked aloe.
If an innocent bird Before my heedless footsteps stirr'd, and stirr'd In little journeys, I beheld in it A disguis'd demon, missioned to knit My soul with under darkness; to entice My stumblings down some monstrous precipice: Therefore I eager followed, and did curse The disappointment.
Time, that aged nurse, Rock'd me to patience.
Now, thank gentle heaven!
These things, with all their comfortings, are given To my down-sunken hours, and with thee, Sweet sister, help to stem the ebbing sea Of weary life."
Thus ended he, and both Sat silent: for the maid was very loth To answer; feeling well that breathed words Would all be lost, unheard, and vain as swords Against the enchased crocodile, or leaps Of grasshoppers against the sun.
She weeps And wonders; struggles to devise some blame; To put on such a look as would say, Shame On this poor weakness!
but, for all her strife, She could as soon have crush'd away the life From a sick dove.
At length, to break the pause, She said with trembling chance: "Is this the cause?
This all?
Yet it is strange, and sad, alas!
That one who through this middle earth should pass Most like a sojourning demi-god, and leave His name upon the harp-string, should achieve No higher bard than simple maidenhood, Singing alone, and fearfully,- how the blood Left his young cheek; and how he used to stray He knew not where; and how he would say, nay, If any said 'twas love: and yet 'twas love; What could it be but love?
How a ring-dove Let fall a sprig of yew tree in his path; And how he died: and then, that love doth scathe The gentle heart, as northern blasts do roses; And then the ballad of his sad life closes With sighs, and an alas!- Endymion!
Be rather in the trumpet's mouth,- anon Among the winds at large- that all may hearken!
Although, before the crystal heavens darken, I watch and dote upon the silver lakes Pictur'd in western cloudiness, that takes The semblance of gold rocks and bright gold sands, Islands, and creeks, and amber-fretted strands With horses prancing o'er them, palaces And towers of amethyst,- would I so teaze My pleasant days, because I could not mount Into those regions?
The Morphean fount Of that fine element that visions, dreams, And fitful whims of sleep are made of, streams Into its airy channels with so subtle, So thin a breathing, not the spider's shuttle, Circled a million times within the space Of a swallow's nest-door, could delay a trace, A tinting of its quality: how light Must dreams themselves be; seeing they're more slight Than the mere nothing that engenders them!
Then wherefore sully the entrusted gem Of high and noble life with thoughts so sick?
Why pierce high-fronted honour to the quick For nothing but a dream?"
Hereat the youth Look'd up: a conflicting of shame and ruth Was in his plaited brow: yet, his eyelids Widened a little, as when Zephyr bids A little breeze to creep between the fans Of careless butterflies: amid his pains He seem'd to taste a drop of manna-dew, Full palatable; and a colour grew Upon his cheek, while thus he lifeful spake.
"Peona!
ever have I long'd to slake My thirst for the world's praises: nothing base, No merely slumberous phantasm, could unlace The stubborn canvas for my voyage prepar'd- Though now 'tis tatter'd; leaving my bark bar'd And sullenly drifting: yet my higher hope Is of too wide, too rainbow-large a scope, To fret at myriads of earthly wrecks.
Wherein lies happiness?
In that which becks Our ready minds to fellowship divine, A fellowship with essence; till we shine, Full alchemiz'd, and free of space.
Behold The clear religion of heaven!
Fold A rose leaf round thy finger's taperness, And soothe thy lips: hist, when the airy stress Of music's kiss impregnates the free winds, And with a sympathetic touch unbinds AEolian magic from their lucid wombs: Then old songs waken from enclouded tombs; Old ditties sigh above their father's grave; Ghosts of melodious prophecyings rave Round every spot where trod Apollo's foot; Bronze clarions awake, and faintly bruit, Where long ago a giant battle was; And, from the turf, a lullaby doth pass In every place where infant Orpheus slept.
Feel we these things?- that moment have we stept Into a sort of oneness, and our state Is like a floating spirit's.
But there are Richer entanglements, enthralments far More self-destroying, leading, by degrees, To the chief intensity: the crown of these Is made of love and friendship, and sits high Upon the forehead of humanity.
All its more ponderous and bulky worth Is friendship, whence there ever issues forth A steady splendour; but at the tip-top, There hangs by unseen film, an orbed drop Of light, and that is love: its influence, Thrown in our eyes, genders a novel sense, At which we start and fret; till in the end, Melting into its radiance, we blend, Mingle, and so become a part of it,- Nor with aught else can our souls interknit So wingedly: when we combine therewith, Life's self is nourish'd by its proper pith, And we are nurtured like a pelican brood.
Aye, so delicious is the unsating food, That men, who might have tower'd in the van Of all the congregated world, to fan And winnow from the coming step of time All chaff of custom, wipe away all slime Left by men-slugs and human serpentry, Have been content to let occasion die, Whilst they did sleep in love's elysium.
And, truly, I would rather be struck dumb, Than speak against this ardent listlessness: For I have ever thought that it might bless The world with benefits unknowingly; As does the nightingale, upperched high, And cloister'd among cool and bunched leaves- She sings but to her love, nor e'er conceives How tiptoe Night holds back her dark-grey hood.
Just so may love, although 'tis understood The mere commingling of passionate breath, Produce more than our searching witnesseth: What I know not: but who, of men, can tell That flowers would bloom, or that green fruit would swell To melting pulp, that fish would have bright mail, The earth its dower of river, wood, and vale, The meadows runnels, runnels pebble-stones, The seed its harvest, or the lute its tones, Tones ravishment, or ravishment its sweet, If human souls did never kiss and greet?
"Now, if this earthly love has power to make Men's being mortal, immortal; to shake Ambition from their memories, and brim Their measure of content: what merest whim, Seems all this poor endeavour after fame, To one, who keeps within his stedfast aim A love immortal, an immortal too.
Look not so wilder'd; for these things are true, And never can be born of atomies That buzz about our slumbers, like brain-flies, Leaving us fancy-sick.
No, no, I'm sure, My restless spirit never could endure To brood so long upon one luxury, Unless it did, though fearfully, espy A hope beyond the shadow of a dream.
My sayings will the less obscured seem, When I have told thee how my waking sight Has made me scruple whether that same night Was pass'd in dreaming.
Hearken, sweet Peona!
Beyond the matron-temple of Latona, Which we should see but for these darkening boughs, Lies a deep hollow, from whose ragged brows Bushes and trees do lean all round athwart And meet so nearly, that with wings outraught, And spreaded tail, a vulture could not glide Past them, but he must brush on every side.
Some moulder'd steps lead into this cool cell, Far as the slabbed margin of a well, Whose patient level peeps its crystal eye Right upward, through the bushes, to the sky.
Oft have I brought thee flowers, on their stalks set Like vestal primroses, but dark velvet Edges them round, and they have golden pits: 'Twas there I got them, from the gaps and slits In a mossy stone, that sometimes was my seat, When all above was faint with mid-day heat.
And there in strife no burning thoughts to heed, I'd bubble up the water through a reed; So reaching back to boy-hood: make me ships Of moulted feathers, touchwood, alder chips, With leaves stuck in them; and the Neptune be Of their petty ocean.
Oftener, heavily, When love-lorn hours had left me less a child, I sat contemplating the figures wild Of o'er-head clouds melting the mirror through.
Upon a day, while thus I watch'd, by flew A cloudy Cupid, with his bow and quiver; So plainly character'd, no breeze would shiver The happy chance: so happy, I was fain To follow it upon the open plain, And, therefore, was just going; when, behold!
A wonder, fair as any I have told- The same bright face I tasted in my sleep, Smiling in the clear well.
My heart did leap Through the cool depth.- It moved as if to flee- I started up, when lo!
refreshfully There came upon my face in plenteous showers Dew-drops, and dewy buds, and leaves, and flowers, Wrapping all objects from my smothered sight, Bathing my spirit in a new delight.
Aye, such a breathless honey-feel of bliss Alone preserved me from the drear abyss Of death, for the fair form had gone again.
Pleasure is oft a visitant; but pain Clings cruelly to us, like the gnawing sloth On the deer's tender haunches: late, and loth, 'Tis scar'd away by slow returning pleasure.
How sickening, how dark the dreadful leisure Of weary days, made deeper exquisite, By a fore-knowledge of unslumbrous night!
Like sorrow came upon me, heavier still, Than when I wander'd from the poppy hill: And a whole age of lingering moments crept Sluggishly by, ere more contentment swept Away at once the deadly yellow spleen.
Yes, thrice have I this fair enchantment seen; Once more been tortured with renewed life.
When last the wintry gusts gave over strife With the conquering sun of spring, and left the skies Warm and serene, but yet with moistened eyes In pity of the shatter'd infant buds,- That time thou didst adorn, with amber studs, My hunting cap, because I laugh'd and smil'd, Chatted with thee, and many days exil'd All torment from my breast;- 'twas even then, Straying about, yet, coop'd up in the den Of helpless discontent,- hurling my lance From place to place, and following at chance, At last, by hap, through some young trees it struck, And, plashing among bedded pebbles, stuck In the middle of a brook,- whose silver ramble Down twenty little falls, through reeds and bramble, Tracing along, it brought me to a cave, Whence it ran brightly forth, and white did lave The nether sides of mossy stones and rock,- 'Mong which it gurgled blythe adieus, to mock Its own sweet grief at parting.
Overhead, Hung a lush screen of drooping weeds, and spread Thick, as to curtain up some wood-nymph's home.
'Ah!
impious mortal, whither do I roam?'
Said I, low voic'd: 'Ah, whither!
'Tis the grot 'Of Proserpine, when Hell, obscure and hot, 'Doth her resign; and where her tender hands 'She dabbles, on the cool and sluicy sands: 'Or 'tis the cell of Echo, where she sits, 'And babbles thorough silence, till her wits 'Are gone in tender madness, and anon, 'Faints into sleep, with many a dying tone 'Of sadness.
O that she would take my vows, 'And breathe them sighingly among the boughs, 'To sue her gentle ears for whose fair head, 'Daily, I pluck sweet flowerets from their bed, 'And weave them dyingly- send honey-whispers 'Round every leaf, that all those gentle lispers 'May sigh my love unto her pitying!
'O charitable Echo!
hear, and sing 'This ditty to her!- tell her'- so I stay'd My foolish tongue, and listening, half afraid, Stood stupefied with my own empty folly, And blushing for the freaks of melancholy.
Salt tears were coming, when I heard my name Most fondly lipp'd, and then these accents came: 'Endymion!
the cave is secreter 'Than the Isle of Delos.
Echo hence shall stir 'No sighs but sigh-warm kisses, or light noise 'Of thy combing hand, the while it travelling cloys 'And trembles through my labyrinthine hair.'
At that oppress'd I hurried in.- Ah!
where Are those swift moments?
Whither are they fled?
I'll smile no more, Peona; nor will wed Sorrow the way to death; but patiently Bear up against it: so farewell, sad sigh; And come instead demurest meditation, To occupy me wholly, and to fashion My pilgrimage for the world's dusky brink.
No more will I count over, link by link, My chain of grief: no longer strive to find A half-forgetfulness in mountain wind Blustering about my ears: aye, thou shalt see, Dearest of sisters, what my life shall be; What a calm round of hours shall make my days.
There is a paly flame of hope that plays Where'er I look: but yet, I'll say 'tis naught- And here I bid it die.
Have not I caught, Already, a more healthy countenance?
By this the sun is setting; we may chance Meet some of our near-dwellers with my car."
This said, he rose, faint-smiling like a star Through autumn mists, and took Peona's hand: They stept into the boat, and launch'd from land.
BOOK II.
O sovereign power of love!
O grief!
O balm!
All records, saving thine, come cool, and calm, And shadowy, through the mist of passed years: For others, good or bad, hatred and tears Have become indolent; but touching thine, One sigh doth echo, one poor sob doth pine, One kiss brings honey-dew from buried days.
The woes of Troy, towers smothering o'er their blaze, Stiff-holden shields, far-piercing spears, keen blades, Struggling, and blood, and shrieks- all dimly fades Into some backward corner of the brain: Yet, in our very souls, we feel amain The close of Troilus and Cressid sweet.
Hence, pageant history!
hence, gilded cheat!
Swart planet in the universe of deeds!
Wide sea, that one continuous murmur breeds Along the pebbled shore of memory!
Many old rotten-timber'd boats there be Upon thy vaporous bosom, magnified To goodly vessels; many a sail of pride, And golden keel'd, is left unlaunch'd and dry.
But wherefore this?
What care, though owl did fly About the great Athenian admiral's mast?
What care, though striding Alexander past The Indus with his Macedonian numbers?
Though old Ulysses tortured from his slumbers The glutted Cyclops, what care?- Juliet leaning Amid her window-flowers,- sighing,- weaning Tenderly her fancy from its maiden snow, Doth more avail than these: the silver flow Of Hero's tears, the swoon of Imogen, Fair Pastorella in the bandit's den, Are things to brood on with more ardency Than the death-day of empires.
Fearfully Must such conviction come upon his head, Who, thus far, discontent, has dared to tread, Without one muse's smile, or kind behest, The path of love and poesy.
But rest, In chaffing restlessness, is yet more drear Than to be crush'd, in striving to uprear Love's standard on the battlements of song.
So once more days and nights aid me along, Like legion'd soldiers.
Brain-sick shepherd prince, What promise hast thou faithful guarded since The day of sacrifice?
Or, have new sorrows Come with the constant dawn upon thy morrows?
Alas!
'tis his old grief.
For many days, Has he been wandering in uncertain ways: Through wilderness, and woods of mossed oaks; Counting his woe-worn minutes, by the strokes Of the lone woodcutter; and listening still, Hour after hour, to each lush-leav'd rill.
Now he is sitting by a shady spring, And elbow-deep with feverous fingering Stems the upbursting cold: a wild rose tree Pavillions him in bloom, and he doth see A bud which snares his fancy: lo!
but now He plucks it, dips its stalk in the water: how!
It swells, it buds, it flowers beneath his sight; And, in the middle, there is softly pight A golden butterfly; upon whose wings There must be surely character'd strange things, For with wide eye he wonders, and smiles oft.
Lightly this little herald flew aloft, Follow'd by glad Endymion's clasped hands: Onward it flies.
From languor's sullen bands His limbs are loos'd, and eager, on he hies Dazzled to trace it in the sunny skies.
It seem'd he flew, the way so easy was; And like a new-born spirit did he pass Through the green evening quiet in the sun, O'er many a heath, through many a woodland dun, Through buried paths, where sleepy twilight dreams The summer time away.
One track unseams A wooded cleft, and, far away, the blue Of ocean fades upon him; then, anew, He sinks adown a solitary glen, Where there was never sound of mortal men, Saving, perhaps, some snow-light cadences Melting to silence, when upon the breeze Some holy bark let forth an anthem sweet, To cheer itself to Delphi.
Still his feet Went swift beneath the merry-winged guide, Until it reach'd a splashing fountain's side That, near a cavern's mouth, for ever pour'd Unto the temperate air: then high it soar'd, And, downward, suddenly began to dip, As if, athirst with so much toil, 'twould sip The crystal spout-head: so it did, with touch Most delicate, as though afraid to smutch Even with mealy gold the waters clear.
But, at that very touch, to disappear So fairy-quick, was strange!
Bewildered, Endymion sought around, and shook each bed Of covert flowers in vain; and then he flung Himself along the grass.
What gentle tongue, What whisperer disturb'd his gloomy rest?
It was a nymph uprisen to the breast In the fountain's pebbly margin, and she stood 'Mong lillies, like the youngest of the brood.
To him her dripping hand she softly kist, And anxiously began to plait and twist Her ringlets round her fingers, saying: "Youth!
Too long, alas, hast thou starv'd on the ruth, The bitterness of love: too long indeed, Seeing thou art so gentle.
Could I weed Thy soul of care, by heavens, I would offer All the bright riches of my crystal coffer To Amphitrite; all my clear-eyed fish, Golden, or rainbow-sided, or purplish, Vermilion-tail'd, or finn'd with silvery gauze; Yea, or my veined pebble-floor, that draws A virgin light to the deep; my grotto-sands Tawny and gold, ooz'd slowly from far lands By my diligent springs; my level lillies, shells, My charming rod, my potent river spells; Yes, every thing, even to the pearly cup Meander gave me,- for I bubbled up To fainting creatures in a desert wild.
But woe is me, I am but as a child To gladden thee; and all I dare to say, Is, that I pity thee; that on this day I've been thy guide; that thou must wander far In other regions, past the scanty bar To mortal steps, before thou canst be ta'en From every wasting sigh, from every pain, Into the gentle bosom of thy love.
Why it is thus, one knows in heaven above: But, a poor Naiad, I guess not.
Farewell!
I have a ditty for my hollow cell."
Hereat, she vanished from Endymion's gaze, Who brooded o'er the water in amaze: The dashing fount pour'd on, and where its pool Lay, half asleep, in grass and rushes cool, Quick waterflies and gnats were sporting still, And fish were dimpling, as if good nor ill Had fallen out that hour.
The wanderer, Holding his forehead, to keep off the bur Of smothering fancies, patiently sat down; And, while beneath the evening's sleepy frown Glow-worms began to trim their starry lamps, Thus breath'd he to himself: "Whoso encamps To take a fancied city of delight, O what a wretch is he!
and when 'tis his, After long toil and travelling, to miss The kernel of his hopes, how more than vile: Yet, for him there's refreshment even in toil; Another city doth he set about, Free from the smallest pebble-head of doubt That he will seize on trickling honey-combs; Alas, he finds them dry; and then he foams, And onward to another city speeds.
But this is human life: the war, the deeds, The disappointment, the anxiety, Imagination's struggles, far and nigh, All human; bearing in themselves this good, That they are still the air, the subtle food, To make us feel existence, and to show How quiet death is.
Where soil is men grow, Whether to weeds or flowers; but for me, There is no depth to strike in: I can see Naught earthly worth my compassing; so stand Upon a misty, jutting head of land- Alone?
No, no; and by the Orphean lute, When mad Eurydice is listening to't; I'd rather stand upon this misty peak, With not a thing to sigh for, or to seek, But the soft shadow of my thrice-seen love, Than be- I care not what.
O meekest dove Of heaven!
O Cynthia, ten-times bright and fair!
From thy blue throne, now filling all the air, Glance but one little beam of temper'd light Into my bosom, that the dreadful might And tyranny of love be somewhat scar'd!
Yet do not so, sweet queen; one torment spar'd, Would give a pang to jealous misery, Worse than the torment's self: but rather tie Large wings upon my shoulders, and point out My love's far dwelling.
Though the playful rout Of Cupids shun thee, too divine art thou, Too keen in beauty, for thy silver prow Not to have dipp'd in love's most gentle stream.
O be propitious, nor severely deem My madness impious; for, by all the stars That tend thy bidding, I do think the bars That kept my spirit in are burst- that I Am sailing with thee through the dizzy sky!
How beautiful thou art!
The world how deep!
How tremulous-dazzlingly the wheels sweep Around their axle!
Then these gleaming reins, How lithe!
When this thy chariot attains Its airy goal, haply some bower veils Those twilight eyes?
Those eyes!- my spirit fails- Dear goddess, help!
or the wide-gaping air Will gulph me- help!"- At this with madden'd stare, And lifted hands, and trembling lips he stood; Like old Deucalion mountain'd o'er the flood, Or blind Orion hungry for the morn.
And, but from the deep cavern there was borne A voice, he had been froze to senseless stone; Nor sigh of his, nor plaint, nor passion'd moan Had more been heard.
Thus swell'd it forth: "Descend, Young mountaineer!
descend where alleys bend Into the sparry hollows of the world!
Oft hast thou seen bolts of the thunder hurl'd As from thy threshold; day by day hast been A little lower than the chilly sheen Of icy pinnacles, and dipp'dst thine arms Into the deadening ether that still charms Their marble being: now, as deep profound As those are high, descend!
He ne'er is crown'd With immortality, who fears to follow Where airy voices lead: so through the hollow, The silent mysteries of earth, descend!"
He heard but the last words, nor could contend One moment in reflection: for he fled Into the fearful deep, to hide his head From the clear moon, the trees, and coming madness.
'Twas far too strange, and wonderful for sadness; Sharpening, by degrees, his appetite To dive into the deepest.
Dark, nor light, The region; nor bright, nor sombre wholly, But mingled up; a gleaming melancholy; A dusky empire and its diadems; One faint eternal eventide of gems.
Aye, millions sparkled on a vein of gold, Along whose track the prince quick footsteps told, With all its lines abrupt and angular: Out-shooting sometimes, like a meteor-star, Through a vast antre; then the metal woof, Like Vulcan's rainbow, with some monstrous roof Curves hugely: now, far in the deep abyss, It seems an angry lightning, and doth hiss Fancy into belief: anon it leads Through winding passages, where sameness breeds Vexing conceptions of some sudden change; Whether to silver grots, or giant range Of sapphire columns, or fantastic bridge Athwart a flood of crystal.
On a ridge Now fareth he, that o'er the vast beneath Towers like an ocean-cliff, and whence he seeth A hundred waterfalls, whose voices come But as the murmuring surge.
Chilly and numb His bosom grew, when first he, far away Descried an orbed diamond, set to fray Old darkness from his throne: 'twas like the sun Uprisen o'er chaos: and with such a stun Came the amazement, that, absorb'd in it, He saw not fiercer wonders- past the wit Of any spirit to tell, but one of those Who, when this planet's sphering time doth close, Will be its high remembrancers: who they?
The mighty ones who have made eternal day For Greece and England.
While astonishment With deep-drawn sighs was quieting, he went Into a marble gallery, passing through A mimic temple, so complete and true In sacred custom, that he well nigh fear'd To search it inwards; whence far off appear'd, Through a long pillar'd vista, a fair shrine, And just beyond, on light tiptoe divine, A quiver'd Dian.
Stepping awfully, The youth approach'd; oft turning his veil'd eye Down sidelong aisles, and into niches old.
And when, more near against the marble cold He had touch'd his forehead, he began to thread All courts and passages, where silence dead Rous'd by his whispering footsteps murmured faint: And long he travers'd to and fro, to acquaint Himself with every mystery, and awe; Till, weary, he sat down before the maw Of a wide outlet, fathomless and dim, To wild uncertainty and shadows grim.
There, when new wonders ceas'd to float before, And thoughts of self came on, how crude and sore The journey homeward to habitual self A mad-pursuing of the fog-born elf, Whose flitting lantern, through rude nettle-briar, Cheats us into a swamp, into a fire, Into the bosom of a hated thing.
What misery most drowningly doth sing In lone Endymion's ear, now he has raught The goal of consciousness?
Ah, 'tis the thought, The deadly feel of solitude: for lo!
He cannot see the heavens, nor the flow Of rivers, nor hill-flowers running wild In pink and purple chequer, nor, up-pil'd, The cloudy rack slow journeying in the west, Like herded elephants; nor felt, nor prest Cool grass, nor tasted the fresh slumberous air; But far from such companionship to wear An unknown time, surcharg'd with grief, away, Was now his lot.
And must he patient stay, Tracing fantastic figures with his spear?
"No!"
exclaim'd he, "why should I tarry here?"
No!
loudly echoed times innumerable.
At which he straightway started, and 'gan tell His paces back into the temple's chief; Warming and glowing strong in the belief Of help from Dian: so that when again He caught her airy form, thus did he plain, Moving more near the while: "O Haunter chaste Of river sides, and woods, and heathy waste, Where with thy silver bow and arrows keen Art thou now forested?
O woodland Queen, What smoothest air thy smoother forehead woos?
Where dost thou listen to the wide halloos Of thy disparted nymphs?
Through what dark tree Glimmers thy crescent?
Wheresoe'er it be, 'Tis in the breath of heaven: thou dost taste Freedom as none can taste it, nor dost waste Thy loveliness in dismal elements; But, finding in our green earth sweet contents, There livest blissfully.
Ah, if to thee It feels Elysian, how rich to me, An exil'd mortal, sounds its pleasant name!
Within my breast there lives a choking flame- O let me cool't the zephyr-boughs among!
A homeward fever parches up my tongue- O let me slake it at the running springs!
Upon my ear a noisy nothing rings- O let me once more hear the linnet's note!
Before mine eyes thick films and shadows float- O let me 'noint them with the heaven's light!
Dost thou now lave thy feet and ankles white?
O think how sweet to me the freshening sluice!
Dost thou now please thy thirst with berry-juice?
O think how this dry palate would rejoice!
If in soft slumber thou dost hear my voice, O think how I should love a bed of flowers!- Young goddess!
let me see my native bowers!
Deliver me from this rapacious deep!"
Thus ending loudly, as he would o'erleap His destiny, alert he stood: but when Obstinate silence came heavily again, Feeling about for its old couch of space And airy cradle, lowly bow'd his face Desponding, o'er the marble floor's cold thrill.
But 'twas not long; for, sweeter than the rill To its old channel, or a swollen tide To margin sallows, were the leaves he spied, And flowers, and wreaths, and ready myrtle crowns Up heaping through the slab: refreshment drowns Itself, and strives its own delights to hide- Nor in one spot alone; the floral pride In a long whispering birth enchanted grew Before his footsteps; as when heav'd anew Old ocean rolls a lengthened wave to the shore, Down whose green back the short-liv'd foam, all hoar, Bursts gradual, with a wayward indolence.
Increasing still in heart, and pleasant sense, Upon his fairy journey on he hastes; So anxious for the end, he scarcely wastes One moment with his hand among the sweets: Onward he goes- he stops- his bosom beats As plainly in his ear, as the faint charm Of which the throbs were born.
This still alarm, This sleepy music, forc'd him walk tiptoe: For it came more softly than the east could blow Arion's magic to the Atlantic isles; Or than the west, made jealous by the smiles Of thron'd Apollo, could breathe back the lyre To seas Ionian and Tyrian.
O did he ever live, that lonely man, Who lov'd- and music slew not?
'Tis the pest Of love, that fairest joys give most unrest; That things of delicate and tenderest worth Are swallow'd all, and made a seared dearth, By one consuming flame: it doth immerse And suffocate true blessings in a curse.
Half-happy, by comparison of bliss, Is miserable.
'Twas even so with this Dew-dropping melody, in the Carian's ear; First heaven, then hell, and then forgotten clear, Vanish'd in elemental passion.
And down some swart abysm he had gone, Had not a heavenly guide benignant led To where thick myrtle branches, 'gainst his head Brushing, awakened: then the sounds again Went noiseless as a passing noontide rain Over a bower, where little space he stood; For as the sunset peeps into a wood So saw he panting light, and towards it went Through winding alleys; and lo, wonderment!
Upon soft verdure saw, one here, one there, Cupids a slumbering on their pinions fair.
After a thousand mazes overgone, At last, with sudden step, he came upon A chamber, myrtle wall'd, embowered high, Full of light, incense, tender minstrelsy, And more of beautiful and strange beside: For on a silken couch of rosy pride, In midst of all, there lay a sleeping youth Of fondest beauty; fonder, in fair sooth, Than sighs could fathom, or contentment reach: And coverlids gold-tinted like the peach, Or ripe October's faded marigolds, Fell sleek about him in a thousand folds- Not hiding up an Apollonian curve Of neck and shoulder, nor the tenting swerve Of knee from knee, nor ankles pointing light; But rather, giving them to the filled sight Officiously.
Sideway his face repos'd On one white arm, and tenderly unclos'd, By tenderest pressure, a faint damask mouth To slumbery pout; just as the morning south Disparts a dew-lipp'd rose.
Above his head, Four lilly stalks did their white honours wed To make a coronal; and round him grew All tendrils green, of every bloom and hue, Together intertwin'd and trammel'd fresh: The vine of glossy sprout; the ivy mesh, Shading its Ethiop berries; and woodbine, Of velvet leaves and bugle-blooms divine; Convolvulus in streaked vases flush; The creeper, mellowing for an autumn blush; And virgin's bower, trailing airily; With others of the sisterhood.
Hard by, Stood serene Cupids watching silently.
One, kneeling to a lyre, touch'd the strings, Muffling to death the pathos with his wings; And, ever and anon, uprose to look At the youth's slumber; while another took A willow-bough, distilling odorous dew, And shook it on his hair; another flew In through the woven roof, and fluttering-wise Rain'd violets upon his sleeping eyes.
At these enchantments, and yet many more, The breathless Latmian wonder'd o'er and o'er; Until, impatient in embarrassment, He forthright pass'd, and lightly treading went To that same feather'd lyrist, who straightway, Smiling, thus whisper'd: "Though from upper day Thou art a wanderer, and thy presence here Might seem unholy, be of happy cheer!
For 'tis the nicest touch of human honour, When some ethereal and high-favouring donor Presents immortal bowers to mortal sense; As now 'tis done to thee, Endymion.
Hence Was I in no wise startled.
So recline Upon these living flowers.
Here is wine, Alive with sparkles- never, I aver, Since Ariadne was a vintager, So cool a purple: taste these juicy pears, Sent me by sad Vertumnus, when his fears Were high about Pomona: here is cream, Deepening to richness from a snowy gleam; Sweeter than that nurse Amalthea skimm'd For the boy Jupiter: and here, undimm'd By any touch, a bunch of blooming plums Ready to melt between an infant's gums: And here is manna pick'd from Syrian trees, In starlight, by the three Hesperides.
Feast on, and meanwhile I will let thee know Of all these things around us."
He did so, Still brooding o'er the cadence of his lyre; And thus: "I need not any hearing tire By telling how the sea-born goddess pin'd For a mortal youth, and how she strove to bind Him all in all unto her doting self.
Who would not be so prison'd?
but, fond elf, He was content to let her amorous plea Faint through his careless arms; content to see An unseiz'd heaven dying at his feet; Content, O fool!
to make a cold retreat, When on the pleasant grass such love, lovelorn, Lay sorrowing; when every tear was born Of diverse passion; when her lips and eyes Were clos'd in sullen moisture, and quick sighs Came vex'd and pettish through her nostrils small.
Hush!
no exclaim- yet, justly mightst thou call Curses upon his head.- I was half glad, But my poor mistress went distract and mad, When the boar tusk'd him: so away she flew To Jove's high throne, and by her plainings drew Immortal tear-drops down the thunderer's beard; Whereon, it was decreed he should be rear'd Each summer time to life.
Lo!
this is he, That same Adonis, safe in the privacy Of this still region all his winter-sleep.
Aye, sleep; for when our love-sick queen did weep Over his waned corse, the tremulous shower Heal'd up the wound, and, with a balmy power, Medicined death to a lengthened drowsiness: The which she fills with visions, and doth dress In all this quiet luxury; and hath set Us young immortals, without any let, To watch his slumber through.
'Tis well nigh pass'd, Even to a moment's filling up, and fast She scuds with summer breezes, to pant through The first long kiss, warm firstling, to renew Embower'd sports in Cytherea's isle.
Look!
how those winged listeners all this while Stand anxious: see!
behold!"- This clamant word Broke through the careful silence; for they heard A rustling noise of leaves, and out there flutter'd Pigeons and doves: Adonis something mutter'd The while one hand, that erst upon his thigh Lay dormant, mov'd convuls'd and gradually Up to his forehead.
Then there was a hum Of sudden voices, echoing, "Come!
come!
Arise!
awake!
Clear summer has forth walk'd Unto the clover-sward, and she has talk'd Full soothingly to every nested finch: Rise, Cupids!
or we'll give the blue-bell pinch To your dimpled arms.
Once more sweet life begin!"
At this, from every side they hurried in, Rubbing their sleepy eyes with lazy wrists, And doubling over head their little fists In backward yawns.
But all were soon alive: For as delicious wine doth, sparkling, dive In nectar'd clouds and curls through water fair, So from the arbour roof down swell'd an air Odorous and enlivening; making all To laugh, and play, and sing, and loudly call For their sweet queen: when lo!
the wreathed green Disparted, and far upward could be seen Blue heaven, and a silver car, air-borne, Whose silent wheels, fresh wet from clouds of morn, Spun off a drizzling dew,- which falling chill On soft Adonis' shoulders, made him still Nestle and turn uneasily about.
Soon were the white doves plain, with neck stretch'd out, And silken traces lighten'd in descent; And soon, returning from love's banishment, Queen Venus leaning downward open arm'd: Her shadow fell upon his breast, and charm'd A tumult to his heart, and a new life Into his eyes.
Ah, miserable strife, But for her comforting!
unhappy sight, But meeting her blue orbs!
Who, who can write Of these first minutes?
The unchariest muse To embracements warm as theirs makes coy excuse.
O it has ruffled every spirit there, Saving Love's self, who stands superb to share The general gladness: awfully he stands; A sovereign quell is in his waving hands; No sight can bear the lightning of his bow; His quiver is mysterious, none can know What themselves think of it; from forth his eyes There darts strange light of varied hues and dyes: A scowl is sometimes on his brow, but who Look full upon it feel anon the blue Of his fair eyes run liquid through their souls.
Endymion feels it, and no more controls The burning prayer within him; so, bent low, He had begun a plaining of his woe.
But Venus, bending forward, said: "My child, Favour this gentle youth; his days are wild With love- he- but alas!
too well I see Thou know'st the deepness of his misery.
Ah, smile not so, my son: I tell thee true, That when through heavy hours I used to rue The endless sleep of this new-born Adon', This stranger aye I pitied.
For upon A dreary morning once I fled away Into the breezy clouds, to weep and pray For this my love: for vexing Mars had teaz'd Me even to tears: thence, when a little eas'd, Down-looking, vacant, through a hazy wood, I saw this youth as he despairing stood: Those same dark curls blown vagrant in the wind; Those same full fringed lids a constant blind Over his sullen eyes: I saw him throw Himself on wither'd leaves, even as though Death had come sudden; for no jot he mov'd, Yet mutter'd wildly.
I could hear he lov'd Some fair immortal, and that his embrace Had zoned her through the night.
There is no trace Of this in heaven: I have mark'd each cheek, And find it is the vainest thing to seek; And that of all things 'tis kept secretest.
Endymion!
one day thou wilt be blest: So still obey the guiding hand that fends Thee safely through these wonders for sweet ends.
'Tis a concealment needful in extreme; And if I guess'd not so, the sunny beam Thou shouldst mount up to with me.
Now adieu!
Here must we leave thee."- At these words upflew The impatient doves, uprose the floating car, Up went the hum celestial.
High afar The Latmian saw them minish into naught; And, when all were clear vanish'd, still he caught A vivid lightning from that dreadful bow.
When all was darkened, with AEtnean throe The earth clos'd- gave a solitary moan- And left him once again in twilight lone.
He did not rave, he did not stare aghast, For all those visions were o'ergone, and past, And he in loneliness: he felt assur'd Of happy times, when all he had endur'd Would seem a feather to the mighty prize.
So, with unusual gladness, on he hies Through caves, and palaces of mottled ore, Gold dome, and crystal wall, and turquois floor, Black polish'd porticos of awful shade, And, at the last, a diamond balustrade, Leading afar past wild magnificence, Spiral through ruggedest loopholes, and thence Stretching across a void, then guiding o'er Enormous chasms, where, all foam and roar, Streams subterranean teaze their granite beds; Then heighten'd just above the silvery heads Of a thousand fountains, so that he could dash The waters with his spear; but at the splash, Done heedlessly, those spouting columns rose Sudden a poplar's height, and 'gan to enclose His diamond path with fretwork, streaming round Alive, and dazzling cool, and with a sound, Haply, like dolphin tumults, when sweet shells Welcome the float of Thetis.
Long he dwells On this delight; for, every minute's space, The streams with changed magic interlace: Sometimes like delicatest lattices, Cover'd with crystal vines; then weeping trees.
Moving about as in a gentle wind, Which, in a wink, to watery gauze refin'd, Pour'd into shapes of curtain'd canopies, Spangled, and rich with liquid broideries Of flowers, peacocks, swans, and naiads fair.
Swifter than lightning went these wonders rare; And then the water, into stubborn streams Collecting, mimick'd the wrought oaken beams, Pillars, and frieze, and high fantastic roof, Of those dusk places in times far aloof Cathedrals call'd.
He bade a loth farewell To these founts Protean, passing gulph, and dell, And torrent, and ten thousand jutting shapes, Half seen through deepest gloom, and griesly gapes, Blackening on every side, and overhead A vaulted dome like Heaven's, far bespread With starlight gems: aye, all so huge and strange, The solitary felt a hurried change Working within him into something dreary,- Vex'd like a morning eagle, lost, and weary, And purblind amid foggy, midnight wolds.
But he revives at once: for who beholds New sudden things, nor casts his mental slough?
Forth from a rugged arch, in the dusk below, Came mother Cybele!
alone- alone- In sombre chariot; dark foldings thrown About her majesty, and front death-pale, With turrets crown'd.
Four maned lions hale The sluggish wheels; solemn their toothed maws, Their surly eyes brow-hidden, heavy paws Uplifted drowsily, and nervy tails Cowering their tawny brushes.
Silent sails This shadowy queen athwart, and faints away In another gloomy arch.
Wherefore delay, Young traveller, in such a mournful place?
Art thou wayworn, or canst not further trace The diamond path?
And does it indeed end Abrupt in middle air?
Yet earthward bend Thy forehead, and to Jupiter cloud-borne Call ardently!
He was indeed wayworn; Abrupt, in middle air, his way was lost; To cloud-borne Jove he bowed, and there crost Towards him a large eagle, 'twixt whose wings, Without one impious word, himself he flings, Committed to the darkness and the gloom: Down, down, uncertain to what pleasant doom, Swift as a fathoming plummet down he fell Through unknown things; till exhaled asphodel, And rose, with spicy fannings interbreath'd, Came swelling forth where little caves were wreath'd So thick with leaves and mosses, that they seem'd Large honey-combs of green, and freshly teem'd With airs delicious.
In the greenest nook The eagle landed him, and farewell took.
It was a jasmine bower, all bestrown With golden moss.
His every sense had grown Ethereal for pleasure; 'bove his head Flew a delight half-graspable; his tread Was Hesperean; to his capable ears Silence was music from the holy spheres; A dewy luxury was in his eyes; The little flowers felt his pleasant sighs And stirr'd them faintly.
Verdant cave and cell He wander'd through, oft wondering at such swell Of sudden exaltation: but, "Alas!"
Said he, "will all this gush of feeling pass Away in solitude?
And must they wane, Like melodies upon a sandy plain, Without an echo?
Then shall I be left So sad, so melancholy, so bereft!
Yet still I feel immortal!
O my love, My breath of life, where art thou?
High above, Dancing before the morning gates of heaven?
Or keeping watch among those starry seven, Old Atlas' children?
Art a maid of the waters, One of shell-winding Triton's bright-hair'd daughters?
Or art, impossible!
a nymph of Dian's, Weaving a coronal of tender scions For very idleness?
Where'er thou art, Methinks it now is at my will to start Into thine arms; to scare Aurora's train, And snatch thee from the morning; o'er the main To scud like a wild bird, and take thee off From thy sea-foamy cradle; or to doff Thy shepherd vest, and woo thee mid fresh leaves.
No, no, too eagerly my soul deceives Its powerless self: I know this cannot be.
O let me then by some sweet dreaming flee To her entrancements: hither, Sleep, awhile!
Hither, most gentle Sleep!
and soothing foil For some few hours the coming solitude."
Thus spake he, and that moment felt endued With power to dream deliciously; so wound Through a dim passage, searching till he found The smoothest mossy bed and deepest, where He threw himself, and just into the air Stretching his indolent arms, he took, O bliss!
A naked waist: "Fair Cupid, whence is this?"
A well-known voice sigh'd, "Sweetest, here am I!"
At which soft ravishment, with doting cry They trembled to each other.- Helicon!
O fountain'd hill!
Old Homer's Helicon!
That thou wouldst spout a little streamlet o'er These sorry pages; then the verse would soar And sing above this gentle pair, like lark Over his nested young: but all is dark Around thine aged top, and thy clear fount Exhales in mists to heaven.
Aye, the count Of mighty Poets is made up; the scroll Is folded by the Muses; the bright roll Is in Apollo's hand: our dazed eyes Have seen a new tinge in the western skies: The world has done its duty.
Yet, oh yet, Although the sun of poesy is set, These lovers did embrace, and we must weep That there is no old power left to steep A quill immortal in their joyous tears.
Long time in silence did their anxious fears Question that thus it was; long time they lay Fondling and kissing every doubt away; Long time ere soft caressing sobs began To mellow into words, and then there ran Two bubbling springs of talk from their sweet lips.
"O known Unknown!
from whom my being sips Such darling essence, wherefore may I not Be ever in these arms?
in this sweet spot Pillow my chin for ever?
ever press These toying hands and kiss their smooth excess?
Why not for ever and for ever feel That breath about my eyes?
Ah, thou wilt steal Away from me again, indeed, indeed- Thou wilt be gone away, and wilt not heed My lonely madness.
Speak, delicious fair!
Is- is it to be so?
No!
Who will dare To pluck thee from me?
And, of thine own will, Full well I feel thou wouldst not leave me.
Still Let me entwine thee surer, surer- now How can we part?
Elysium!
who art thou?
Who, that thou canst not be for ever here, Or lift me with thee to some starry sphere?
Enchantress!
tell me by this soft embrace, By the most soft completion of thy face, Those lips, O slippery blisses, twinkling eyes And by these tenderest, milky sovereignties- These tenderest, and by the nectar-wine, The passion"- "O dov'd Ida the divine!
Endymion!
dearest!
Ah, unhappy me!
His soul will 'scape us- O felicity!
How he does love me!
His poor temples beat To the very tune of love- how sweet, sweet, sweet.
Revive, dear youth, or I shall faint and die; Revive, or these soft hours will hurry by In tranced dulness; speak, and let that spell Affright this lethargy!
I cannot quell Its heavy pressure, and will press at least My lips to thine, that they may richly feast Until we taste the life of love again.
What!
dost thou move?
dost kiss?
O bliss!
O pain!
I love thee, youth, more than I can conceive; And so long absence from thee doth bereave My soul of any rest: yet must I hence: Yet, can I not to starry eminence Uplift thee; nor for very shame can own Myself to thee: Ah, dearest, do not groan Or thou wilt force me from this secrecy, And I must blush in heaven.
O that I Had done't already; that the dreadful smiles At my lost brightness, my impassion'd wiles, Had waned from Olympus' solemn height, And from all serious Gods; that our delight Was quite forgotten, save of us alone!
And wherefore so ashamed?
'Tis but to atone For endless pleasure, by some coward blushes: Yet must I be a coward!- Horror rushes Too palpable before me- the sad look Of Jove- Minerva's start- no bosom shook With awe of purity- no Cupid pinion In reverence vailed- my crystalline dominion Half lost, and all old hymns made nullity!
But what is this to love?
O I could fly With thee into the ken of heavenly powers, So thou wouldst thus, for many sequent hours, Press me so sweetly.
Now I swear at once That I am wise, that Pallas is a dunce- Perhaps her love like mine is but unknown- O I do think that I have been alone In chastity: yes, Pallas has been sighing, While every eve saw me my hair uptying With fingers cool as aspen leaves.
Sweet love, I was as vague as solitary dove, Nor knew that nests were built.
Now a soft kiss- Aye, by that kiss, I vow an endless bliss, An immortality of passion's thine: Ere long I will exalt thee to the shine Of heaven ambrosial; and we will shade Ourselves whole summers by a river glade; And I will tell thee stories of the sky, And breathe thee whispers of its minstrelsy.
My happy love will overwing all bounds!
O let me melt into thee; let the sounds Of our close voices marry at their birth; Let us entwine hoveringly- O dearth Of human words!
roughness of mortal speech!
Lispings empyrean will I sometime teach Thine honied tongue- lute-breathings, which I gasp To have thee understand, now while I clasp Thee thus, and weep for fondness- I am pain'd, Endymion: woe!
woe!
is grief contain'd In the very deeps of pleasure, my sole life?"- Hereat, with many sobs, her gentle strife Melted into a languor.
He return'd Entranced vows and tears.
Ye who have yearn'd With too much passion, will here stay and pity, For the mere sake of truth; as 'tis a ditty Not of these days, but long ago 'twas told By a cavern wind unto a forest old; And then the forest told it in a dream To a sleeping lake, whose cool and level gleam A poet caught as he was journeying To Phoebus' shrine; and in it he did fling His weary limbs, bathing an hour's space, And after, straight in that inspired place He sang the story up into the air, Giving it universal freedom.
There Has it been ever sounding for those ears Whose tips are glowing hot.
The legend cheers Yon centinel stars; and he who listens to it Must surely be self-doom'd or he will rue it: For quenchless burnings come upon the heart, Made fiercer by a fear lest any part Should be engulphed in the eddying wind.
As much as here is penn'd doth always find A resting place, thus much comes clear and plain; Anon the strange voice is upon the wane- And 'tis but echo'd from departing sound, That the fair visitant at last unwound Her gentle limbs, and left the youth asleep.- Thus the tradition of the gusty deep.
Now turn we to our former chroniclers.- Endymion awoke, that grief of hers Sweet paining on his ear: he sickly guess'd How lone he was once more, and sadly press'd His empty arms together, hung his head, And most forlorn upon that widow'd bed Sat silently.
Love's madness he had known: Often with more than tortured lion's groan Moanings had burst from him; but now that rage Had pass'd away: no longer did he wage A rough-voic'd war against the dooming stars.
No, he had felt too much for such harsh jars: The lyre of his soul AEolian tun'd Forgot all violence, and but commun'd With melancholy thought: O he had swoon'd Drunken from pleasure's nipple; and his love Henceforth was dove-like.- Loth was he to move From the imprinted couch, and when he did, 'Twas with slow, languid paces, and face hid In muffling hands.
So temper'd, out he stray'd Half seeing visions that might have dismay'd Alecto's serpents; ravishments more keen Than Hermes' pipe, when anxious he did lean Over eclipsing eyes: and at the last It was a sounding grotto, vaulted, vast, O'er studded with a thousand, thousand pearls, And crimson mouthed shells with stubborn curls, Of every shape and size, even to the bulk In which whales arbour close, to brood and sulk Against an endless storm.
Moreover too, Fish-semblances, of green and azure hue, Ready to snort their streams.
In this cool wonder Endymion sat down, and 'gan to ponder On all his life: his youth, up to the day When 'mid acclaim, and feasts, and garlands gay, He stept upon his shepherd throne: the look Of his white palace in wild forest nook, And all the revels he had lorded there: Each tender maiden whom he once thought fair, With every friend and fellow-woodlander- Pass'd like a dream before him.
Then the spur Of the old bards to mighty deeds: his plans To nurse the golden age 'mong shepherd clans: That wondrous night: the great Pan-festival: His sister's sorrow; and his wanderings all, Until into the earth's deep maw he rush'd: Then all its buried magic, till it flush'd High with excessive love.
"And now," thought he, "How long must I remain in jeopardy Of blank amazements that amaze no more?
Now I have tasted her sweet soul to the core All other depths are shallow: essences, Once spiritual, are like muddy lees, Meant but to fertilize my earthly root, And make my branches lift a golden fruit Into the bloom of heaven: other light, Though it be quick and sharp enough to blight The Olympian eagle's vision, is dark, Dark as the parentage of chaos.
Hark!
My silent thoughts are echoing from these shells; Or they are but the ghosts, the dying swells Of noises far away?- list!"- Hereupon He kept an anxious ear.
The humming tone Came louder, and behold, there as he lay, On either side outgush'd, with misty spray, A copious spring; and both together dash'd Swift, mad, fantastic round the rocks and lash'd Among the conchs and shells of the lofty grot, Leaving a trickling dew.
At last they shot Down from the ceiling's height, pouring a noise As of some breathless racers whose hopes poize Upon the last few steps, and with spent force Along the ground they took a winding course.
Endymion follow'd- for it seem'd that one Ever pursued, the other strove to shun- Follow'd their languid mazes, till well nigh He had left thinking of the mystery,- And was now rapt in tender hoverings Over the vanish'd bliss.
Ah!
what is it sings His dream away?
What melodies are these?
They sound as through the whispering of trees, Not native in such barren vaults.
Give ear!
"O Arethusa, peerless nymph!
why fear Such tenderness as mine?
Great Dian, why, Why didst thou hear her prayer?
O that I Were rippling round her dainty fairness now, Circling about her waist, and striving how To entice her to a dive!
then stealing in Between her luscious lips and eyelids thin.
O that her shining hair was in the sun, And I distilling from it thence to run In amorous rillets down her shrinking form!
To linger on her lilly shoulders, warm Between her kissing breasts, and every charm Touch raptur'd!- See how painfully I flow: Fair maid, be pitiful to my great woe.
Stay, stay thy weary course, and let me lead, A happy wooer, to the flowery mead Where all that beauty snar'd me."- "Cruel god, Desist!
or my offended mistress' nod Will stagnate all thy fountains:- teaze me not With syren words- Ah, have I really got Such power to madden thee?
And is it true- Away, away, or I shall dearly rue My very thoughts: in mercy then away, Kindest Alpheus, for should I obey My own dear will, 'twould be a deadly bane.
O, Oread-Queen!
would that thou hadst a pain Like this of mine, then would I fearless turn And be a criminal.
Alas, I burn, I shudder- gentle river, get thee hence.
Alpheus!
thou enchanter!
every sense Of mine was once made perfect in these woods.
Fresh breezes, bowery lawns, and innocent floods, Ripe fruits, and lonely couch, contentment gave; But ever since I heedlessly did lave In thy deceitful stream, a panting glow Grew strong within me: wherefore serve me so, And call it love?
Alas, 'twas cruelty.
Not once more did I close my happy eye Amid the thrushes' song.
Away!
Avaunt!
O 'twas a cruel thing."- "Now thou dost taunt So softly, Arethusa, that I think If thou wast playing on my shady brink, Thou wouldst bathe once again.
Innocent maid!
Stifle thine heart no more; nor be afraid Of angry powers: there are deities Will shade us with their wings.
Those fitful sighs 'Tis almost death to hear: O let me pour A dewy balm upon them!- fear no more, Sweet Arethusa!
Dian's self must feel Sometime these very pangs.
Dear maiden, steal Blushing into my soul, and let us fly These dreary caverns for the open sky.
I will delight thee all my winding course, From the green sea up to my hidden source About Arcadian forests; and will show The channels where my coolest waters flow Through mossy rocks; where, 'mid exuberant green, I roam in pleasant darkness, more unseen Than Saturn in his exile; where I brim Round flowery islands, and take thence a skim Of mealy sweets, which myriads of bees Buzz from their honey'd wings: and thou shouldst please Thyself to choose the richest, where we might Be incense-pillow'd every summer night.
Doff all sad fears, thou white deliciousness, And let us be thus comforted; unless Thou couldst rejoice to see my hopeless stream Hurry distracted from Sol's temperate beam, And pour to death along some hungry sands."- "What can I do, Alpheus?
Dian stands Severe before me: persecuting fate!
Unhappy Arethusa!
thou wast late A huntress free in"- At this, sudden fell Those two sad streams adown a fearful dell.
The Latmian listen'd, but he heard no more, Save echo, faint repeating o'er and o'er The name of Arethusa.
On the verge Of that dark gulph he wept, and said: "I urge Thee, gentle Goddess of my pilgrimage, By our eternal hopes, to soothe, to assuage, If thou art powerful, these lovers' pains; And make them happy in some happy plains."
He turn'd- there was a whelming sound- he stept, There was a cooler light; and so he kept Towards it by a sandy path, and lo!
More suddenly than doth a moment go, The visions of the earth were gone and fled- He saw the giant sea above his head.
BOOK III.
There are who lord it o'er their fellow-men With most prevailing tinsel: who unpen Their baaing vanities, to browse away The comfortable green and juicy hay From human pastures; or, O torturing fact!
Who, through an idiot blink, will see unpack'd Fire-branded foxes to sear up and singe Our gold and ripe-ear'd hopes.
With not one tinge Of sanctuary splendour, not a sight Able to face an owl's, they still are dight By the blear-eyed nations in empurpled vests, And crowns, and turbans.
With unladen breasts, Save of blown self-applause, they proudly mount To their spirit's perch, their being's high account, Their tiptop nothings, their dull skies, their thrones- Amid the fierce intoxicating tones Of trumpets, shoutings, and belabour'd drums, And sudden cannon.
Ah!
how all this hums, In wakeful ears, like uproar past and gone- Like thunder clouds that spake to Babylon, And set those old Chaldeans to their tasks.- Are then regalities all gilded masks?
No, there are throned seats unscalable But by a patient wing, a constant spell, Or by ethereal things that, unconfin'd, Can make a ladder of the eternal wind, And poize about in cloudy thunder-tents To watch the abysm-birth of elements.
Aye, 'bove the withering of old-lipp'd Fate A thousand Powers keep religious state, In water, fiery realm, and airy bourne; And, silent as a consecrated urn, Hold sphery sessions for a season due.
Yet few of these far majesties, ah, few!
Have bared their operations to this globe- Few, who with gorgeous pageantry enrobe Our piece of heaven- whose benevolence Shakes hand with our own Ceres; every sense Filling with spiritual sweets to plenitude, As bees gorge full their cells.
And, by the feud 'Twixt Nothing and Creation, I here swear, Eterne Apollo!
that thy Sister fair Is of all these the gentlier- mightiest.
When thy gold breath is misting in the west, She unobserved steals unto her throne, And there she sits most meek and most alone; As if she had not pomp subservient; As if thine eye, high Poet!
was not bent Towards her with the Muses in thine heart; As if the ministring stars kept not apart, Waiting for silver-footed messages.
O Moon!
the oldest shades 'mong oldest trees Feel palpitations when thou lookest in: O Moon!
old boughs lisp forth a holier din The while they feel thine airy fellowship.
Thou dost bless every where, with silver lip Kissing dead things to life.
The sleeping kine, Couch'd in thy brightness, dream of fields divine: Innumerable mountains rise, and rise, Ambitious for the hallowing of thine eyes; And yet thy benediction passeth not One obscure hiding-place, one little spot Where pleasure may be sent: the nested wren Has thy fair face within its tranquil ken, And from beneath a sheltering ivy leaf Takes glimpses of thee; thou art a relief To the poor patient oyster, where it sleeps Within its pearly house.- The mighty deeps, The monstrous sea is thine- the myriad sea!
O Moon!
far-spooming Ocean bows to thee, And Tellus feels his forehead's cumbrous load.
Cynthia!
where art thou now?
What far abode Of green or silvery bower doth enshrine Such utmost beauty?
Alas, thou dost pine For one as sorrowful: thy cheek is pale For one whose cheek is pale: thou dost bewail His tears, who weeps for thee.
Where dost thou sigh?
Ah!
surely that light peeps from Vesper's eye, Or what a thing is love!
'Tis She, but lo!
How chang'd, how full of ache, how gone in woe!
She dies at the thinnest cloud; her loveliness Is wan on Neptune's blue: yet there's a stress Of love-spangles, just off yon cape of trees, Dancing upon the waves, as if to please The curly foam with amorous influence.
O, not so idle: for down-glancing thence She fathoms eddies, and runs wild about O'erwhelming water-courses; scaring out The thorny sharks from hiding-holes, and fright'ning Their savage eyes with unaccustom'd lightning.
Where will the splendour be content to reach?
O love!
how potent hast thou been to teach Strange journeyings!
Wherever beauty dwells, In gulph or aerie, mountains or deep dells, In light, in gloom, in star or blazing sun, Thou pointest out the way, and straight 'tis won.
Amid his toil thou gav'st Leander breath; Thou leddest Orpheus through the gleams of death; Thou madest Pluto bear thin element; And now, O winged Chieftain!
thou hast sent A moon-beam to the deep, deep water-world, To find Endymion.
On gold sand impearl'd With lilly shells, and pebbles milky white, Poor Cynthia greeted him, and sooth'd her light Against his pallid face: he felt the charm To breathlessness, and suddenly a warm Of his heart's blood: 'twas very sweet; he stay'd His wandering steps, and half-entranced laid His head upon a tuft of straggling weeds, To taste the gentle moon, and freshening beads, Lash'd from the crystal roof by fishes' tails.
And so he kept, until the rosy veils Mantling the east, by Aurora's peering hand Were lifted from the water's breast, and fann'd Into sweet air; and sober'd morning came Meekly through billows:- when like taper-flame Left sudden by a dallying breath of air, He rose in silence, and once more 'gan fare Along his fated way.
Far had he roam'd, With nothing save the hollow vast, that foam'd, Above, around, and at his feet; save things More dead than Morpheus' imaginings: Old rusted anchors, helmets, breast-plates large Of gone sea-warriors; brazen beaks and targe; Rudders that for a hundred years had lost The sway of human hand; gold vase emboss'd With long-forgotten story, and wherein No reveller had ever dipp'd a chin But those of Saturn's vintage; mouldering scrolls, Writ in the tongue of heaven, by those souls Who first were on the earth; and sculptures rude In ponderous stone, developing the mood Of ancient Nox;- then skeletons of man, Of beast, behemoth, and leviathan, And elephant, and eagle, and huge jaw Of nameless monster.
A cold leaden awe These secrets struck into him; and unless Dian had chaced away that heaviness, He might have died: but now, with cheered feel, He onward kept; wooing these thoughts to steal About the labyrinth in his soul of love.
"What is there in thee, Moon!
that thou shouldst move My heart so potently?
When yet a child I oft have dried my tears when thou hast smil'd.
Thou seem'dst my sister: hand in hand we went From eve to morn across the firmament.
No apples would I gather from the tree, Till thou hadst cool'd their cheeks deliciously: No tumbling water ever spake romance, But when my eyes with thine thereon could dance: No woods were green enough, no bower divine, Until thou liftedst up thine eyelids fine: In sowing time ne'er would I dibble take, Or drop a seed, till thou wast wide awake; And, in the summer tide of blossoming, No one but thee hath heard me blithly sing And mesh my dewy flowers all the night.
No melody was like a passing spright If it went not to solemnize thy reign.
Yes, in my boyhood, every joy and pain By thee were fashion'd to the self-same end; And as I grew in years, still didst thou blend With all my ardours: thou wast the deep glen; Thou wast the mountain-top- the sage's pen- The poet's harp- the voice of friends- the sun; Thou wast the river- thou wast glory won; Thou wast my clarion's blast- thou wast my steed- My goblet full of wine- my topmost deed:- Thou wast the charm of women, lovely Moon!
O what a wild and harmonized tune My spirit struck from all the beautiful!
On some bright essence could I lean, and lull Myself to immortality: I prest Nature's soft pillow in a wakeful rest.
But, gentle Orb!
there came a nearer bliss- My strange love came- Felicity's abyss!
She came, and thou didst fade, and fade away- Yet not entirely; no, thy starry sway Has been an under-passion to this hour.
Now I begin to feel thine orby power Is coming fresh upon me: O be kind, Keep back thine influence, and do not blind My sovereign vision.- Dearest love, forgive That I can think away from thee and live!- Pardon me, airy planet, that I prize One thought beyond thine argent luxuries!
How far beyond!"
At this a surpris'd start Frosted the springing verdure of his heart; For as he lifted up his eyes to swear How his own goddess was past all things fair, He saw far in the concave green of the sea An old man sitting calm and peacefully.
Upon a weeded rock this old man sat, And his white hair was awful, and a mat Of weeds were cold beneath his cold thin feet; And, ample as the largest winding-sheet, A cloak of blue wrapp'd up his aged bones, O'erwrought with symbols by the deepest groans Of ambitious magic: every ocean-form Was woven in with black distinctness; storm, And calm, and whispering, and hideous roar, Quicksand, and whirlpool, and deserted shore, Were emblem'd in the woof; with every shape That skims, or dives, or sleeps, 'twixt cape and cape.
The gulphing whale was like a dot in the spell, Yet look upon it, and 'twould size and swell To its huge self; and the minutest fish Would pass the very hardest gazer's wish, And show his little eye's anatomy.
Then there was pictur'd the regality Of Neptune; and the sea nymphs round his state, In beauteous vassalage, look up and wait.
Beside this old man lay a pearly wand, And in his lap a book, the which he conn'd So stedfastly, that the new denizen Had time to keep him in amazed ken, To mark these shadowings, and stand in awe.
The old man rais'd his hoary head and saw The wilder'd stranger- seeming not to see, His features were so lifeless.
Suddenly He woke as from a trance; his snow-white brows Went arching up, and like two magic ploughs Furrow'd deep wrinkles in his forehead large, Which kept as fixedly as rocky marge, Till round his wither'd lips had gone a smile.
Then up he rose, like one whose tedious toil Had watch'd for years in forlorn hermitage, Who had not from mid-life to utmost age Eas'd in one accent his o'er-burden'd soul, Even to the trees.
He rose: he grasp'd his stole, With convuls'd clenches waving it abroad, And in a voice of solemn joy, that aw'd Echo into oblivion, he said:- "Thou art the man!
Now shall I lay my head In peace upon my watery pillow: now Sleep will come smoothly to my weary brow.
O Jove!
I shall be young again, be young!
O shell-borne Neptune, I am pierc'd and stung With new-born life!
What shall I do?
Where go, When I have cast this serpent-skin of woe?- I'll swim to the syrens, and one moment listen Their melodies, and see their long hair glisten; Anon upon that giant's arm I'll be, That writhes about the roots of Sicily: To northern seas I'll in a twinkling sail, And mount upon the snortings of a whale To some black cloud; thence down I'll madly sweep On forked lightning, to the deepest deep, Where through some sucking pool I will be hurl'd With rapture to the other side of the world!
O, I am full of gladness!
Sisters three, I bow full hearted to your old decree!
Yes, every god be thank'd, and power benign, For I no more shall wither, droop, and pine.
Thou art the man!"
Endymion started back Dismay'd; and, like a wretch from whom the rack Tortures hot breath, and speech of agony, Mutter'd: "What lonely death am I to die In this cold region?
Will he let me freeze, And float my brittle limbs o'er polar seas?
Or will he touch me with his searing hand, And leave a black memorial on the sand?
Or tear me piece-meal with a bony saw, And keep me as a chosen food to draw His magian fish through hated fire and flame?
O misery of hell!
resistless, tame, Am I to be burnt up?
No, I will shout, Until the gods through heaven's blue look out!- O Tartarus!
but some few days agone Her soft arms were entwining me, and on Her voice I hung like fruit among green leaves: Her lips were all my own, and- ah, ripe sheaves Of happiness!
ye on the stubble droop, But never may be garner'd.
I must stoop My head, and kiss death's foot.
Love!
love, farewell!
Is there no hope from thee?
This horrid spell Would melt at thy sweet breath.- By Dian's hind Feeding from her white fingers, on the wind I see thy streaming hair!
and now, by Pan, I care not for this old mysterious man!"
He spake, and walking to that aged form, Look'd high defiance.
Lo!
his heart 'gan warm With pity, for the grey-hair'd creature wept.
Had he then wrong'd a heart where sorrow kept?
Had he, though blindly contumelious, brought Rheum to kind eyes, a sting to humane thought, Convulsion to a mouth of many years?
He had in truth; and he was ripe for tears.
The penitent shower fell, as down he knelt Before that care-worn sage, who trembling felt About his large dark locks, and faultering spake: "Arise, good youth, for sacred Phoebus' sake!
I know thine inmost bosom, and I feel A very brother's yearning for thee steal Into mine own: for why?
thou openest The prison gates that have so long opprest My weary watching.
Though thou know'st it not, Thou art commission'd to this fated spot For great enfranchisement.
O weep no more; I am a friend to love, to loves of yore: Aye, hadst thou never lov'd an unknown power, I had been grieving at this joyous hour.
But even now most miserable old, I saw thee, and my blood no longer cold Gave mighty pulses: in this tottering case Grew a new heart, which at this moment plays As dancingly as thine.
Be not afraid, For thou shalt hear this secret all display'd, Now as we speed towards our joyous task."
So saying, this young soul in age's mask Went forward with the Carian side by side: Resuming quickly thus: while ocean's tide Hung swollen at their backs, and jewel'd sands Took silently their foot-prints.
"My soul stands Now past the midway from mortality, And so I can prepare without a sigh To tell thee briefly all my joy and pain.
I was a fisher once, upon this main, And my boat danc'd in every creek and bay; Rough billows were my home by night and day,- The sea-gulls not more constant; for I had No housing from the storm and tempests mad, But hollow rocks,- and they were palaces Of silent happiness, of slumberous ease: Long years of misery have told me so.
Aye, thus it was one thousand years ago.
One thousand years!- Is it then possible To look so plainly through them?
to dispel A thousand years with backward glance sublime?
To breathe away as 'twere all scummy slime From off a crystal pool, to see its deep, And one's own image from the bottom peep?
Yes: now I am no longer wretched thrall, My long captivity and moanings all Are but a slime, a thin-pervading scum, The which I breathe away, and thronging come Like things of yesterday my youthful pleasures.
"I touch'd no lute, I sang not, trod no measures: I was a lonely youth on desert shores.
My sports were lonely, 'mid continuous roars, And craggy isles, and sea-mew's plaintive cry Plaining discrepant between sea and sky.
Dolphins were still my playmates; shapes unseen Would let me feel their scales of gold and green, Nor be my desolation; and, full oft, When a dread waterspout had rear'd aloft Its hungry hugeness, seeming ready ripe To burst with hoarsest thunderings, and wipe My life away like a vast sponge of fate, Some friendly monster, pitying my sad state, Has dived to its foundations, gulph'd it down, And left me tossing safely.
But the crown Of all my life was utmost quietude: More did I love to lie in cavern rude, Keeping in wait whole days for Neptune's voice, And if it came at last, hark, and rejoice!
There blush'd no summer eve but I would steer My skiff along green shelving coasts, to hear The shepherd's pipe come clear from aery steep, Mingled with ceaseless bleatings of his sheep: And never was a day of summer shine, But I beheld its birth upon the brine: For I would watch all night to see unfold Heaven's gates, and AEthon snort his morning gold Wide o'er the swelling streams: and constantly At brim of day-tide, on some grassy lea, My nets would be spread out, and I at rest.
The poor folk of the sea-country I blest With daily boon of fish most delicate: They knew not whence this bounty, and elate Would strew sweet flowers on a sterile beach.
"Why was I not contented?
Wherefore reach At things which, but for thee, O Latmian!
Had been my dreary death?
Fool!
I began To feel distemper'd longings: to desire The utmost privilege that ocean's sire Could grant in benediction: to be free Of all his kingdom.
Long in misery I wasted, ere in one extremest fit I plung'd for life or death.
To interknit One's senses with so dense a breathing stuff Might seem a work of pain; so not enough Can I admire how crystal-smooth it felt, And buoyant round my limbs.
At first I dwelt Whole days and days in sheer astonishment; Forgetful utterly of self-intent; Moving but with the mighty ebb and flow.
Then, like a new fledg'd bird that first doth show His spreaded feathers to the morrow chill, I tried in fear the pinions of my will.
'Twas freedom!
and at once I visited The ceaseless wonders of this ocean-bed.
No need to tell thee of them, for I see That thou hast been a witness- it must be- For these I know thou canst not feel a drouth, By the melancholy corners of that mouth.
So I will in my story straightway pass To more immediate matter.
Woe, alas!
That love should be my bane!
Ah, Scylla fair!
Why did poor Glaucus ever- ever dare To sue thee to his heart?
Kind stranger- youth!
I lov'd her to the very white of truth, And she would not conceive it.
Timid thing!
She fled me swift as sea-bird on the wing, Round every isle, and point, and promontory, From where large Hercules wound up his story Far as Egyptian Nile.
My passion grew The more, the more I saw her dainty hue Gleam delicately through the azure clear: Until 'twas too fierce agony to bear; And in that agony, across my grief It flash'd, that Circe might find some relief- Cruel enchantress!
So above the water I rear'd my head, and look'd for Phoebus' daughter, AEaea's isle was wondering at the moon:- It seem'd to whirl around me, and a swoon Left me dead-drifting to that fatal power.
"When I awoke, 'twas in a twilight bower; Just when the light of morn, with hum of bees, Stole through its verdurous matting of fresh trees.
How sweet, and sweeter!
for I heard a lyre, And over it a sighing voice expire.
It ceased- I caught light footsteps; and anon The fairest face that morn e'er look'd upon Push'd through a screen of roses.
Starry Jove!
With tears, and smiles, and honey-words she wove A net whose thraldom was more bliss than all The range of flower'd Elysium.
Thus did fall The dew of her rich speech: 'Ah!
Art awake?
'O let me hear thee speak, for Cupid's sake!
'I am so oppress'd with joy!
Why, I have shed 'An urn of tears, as though thou wert cold dead; 'And now I find thee living, I will pour 'From these devoted eyes their silver store, 'Until exhausted of the latest drop, 'So it will pleasure thee, and force thee stop 'Here, that I too may live: but if beyond 'Such cool and sorrowful offerings, thou art fond 'Of soothing warmth, of dalliance supreme; 'If thou art ripe to taste a long love dream; 'If smiles, if dimples, tongues for ardour mute, 'Hang in thy vision like a tempting fruit, 'O let me pluck it for thee.'
Thus she link'd Her charming syllables, till indistinct Their music came to my o'er-sweeten'd soul; And then she hover'd over me, and stole So near, that if no nearer it had been This furrow'd visage thou hadst never seen.
"Young man of Latmos!
thus particular Am I, that thou may'st plainly see how far This fierce temptation went: and thou may'st not Exclaim, How then, was Scylla quite forgot?
"Who could resist?
Who in this universe?
She did so breathe ambrosia; so immerse My fine existence in a golden clime.
She took me like a child of suckling time, And cradled me in roses.
Thus condemn'd, The current of my former life was stemm'd, And to this arbitrary queen of sense I bow'd a tranced vassal: nor would thence Have mov'd, even though Amphion's harp had woo'd Me back to Scylla o'er the billows rude.
For as Apollo each eve doth devise A new appareling for western skies; So every eve, nay every spendthrift hour Shed balmy consciousness within that bower.
And I was free of haunts umbrageous; Could wander in the mazy forest-house Of squirrels, foxes shy, and antler'd deer, And birds from coverts innermost and drear Warbling for very joy mellifluous sorrow- To me new born delights!
"Now let me borrow, For moments few, a temperament as stern As Pluto's sceptre, that my words not burn These uttering lips, while I in calm speech tell How specious heaven was changed to real hell.
"One morn she left me sleeping: half awake I sought for her smooth arms and lips, to slake My greedy thirst with nectarous camel-draughts; But she was gone.
Whereat the barbed shafts Of disappointment stuck in me so sore, That out I ran and search'd the forest o'er.
Wandering about in pine and cedar gloom Damp awe assail'd me; for there 'gan to boom A sound of moan, an agony of sound, Sepulchral from the distance all around.
Then came a conquering earth-thunder, and rumbled That fierce complain to silence: while I stumbled Down a precipitous path, as if impell'd.
I came to a dark valley.- Groanings swell'd Poisonous about my ears, and louder grew, The nearer I approach'd a flame's gaunt blue, That glar'd before me through a thorny brake.
This fire, like the eye of gordian snake, Bewitch'd me towards; and I soon was near A sight too fearful for the feel of fear: In thicket hid I curs'd the haggard scene- The banquet of my arms, my arbour queen, Seated upon an uptorn forest root; And all around her shapes, wizard and brute, Laughing, and wailing, groveling, serpenting, Showing tooth, tusk, and venom-bag, and sting!
O such deformities!
Old Charon's self, Should he give up awhile his penny pelf, And take a dream 'mong rushes Stygian, It could not be so phantasied.
Fierce, wan, And tyrannizing was the lady's look, As over them a gnarled staff she shook.
Oft-times upon the sudden she laugh'd out, And from a basket emptied to the rout Clusters of grapes, the which they raven'd quick And roar'd for more; with many a hungry lick About their shaggy jaws.
Avenging, slow, Anon she took a branch of mistletoe, And emptied on't a black dull-gurgling phial: Groan'd one and all, as if some piercing trial Was sharpening for their pitiable bones.
She lifted up the charm: appealing groans From their poor breasts went sueing to her ear In vain; remorseless as an infant's bier She whisk'd against their eyes the sooty oil.
Whereat was heard a noise of painful toil, Increasing gradual to a tempest rage, Shrieks, yells, and groans of torture-pilgrimage; Until their grieved bodies 'gan to bloat And puff from the tail's end to stifled throat: Then was appalling silence: then a sight More wildering than all that hoarse affright; For the whole herd, as by a whirlwind writhen, Went through the dismal air like one huge Python Antagonizing Boreas,- and so vanish'd.
Yet there was not a breath of wind: she banish'd These phantoms with a nod.
Lo!
from the dark Came waggish fauns, and nymphs, and satyrs stark, With dancing and loud revelry,- and went Swifter than centaurs after rapine bent.- Sighing an elephant appear'd and bow'd Before the fierce witch, speaking thus aloud In human accent: 'Potent goddess!
chief 'Of pains resistless!
make my being brief, 'Or let me from this heavy prison fly: 'Or give me to the air, or let me die!
'I sue not for my happy crown again; 'I sue not for my phalanx on the plain; 'I sue not for my lone, my widow'd wife; 'I sue not for my ruddy drops of life, 'My children fair, my lovely girls and boys!
'I will forget them; I will pass these joys; 'Ask nought so heavenward, so too- too high: 'Only I pray, as fairest boon, to die, 'Or be deliver'd from this cumbrous flesh, 'From this gross, detestable, filthy mesh, 'And merely given to the cold bleak air.
'Have mercy, Goddess!
Circe, feel my prayer!'
"That curst magician's name fell icy numb Upon my wild conjecturing: truth had come Naked and sabre-like against my heart.
I saw a fury whetting a death-dart; And my slain spirit, overwrought with fright, Fainted away in that dark lair of night.
Think, my deliverer, how desolate My waking must have been!
disgust, and hate, And terrors manifold divided me A spoil amongst them.
I prepar'd to flee Into the dungeon core of that wild wood: I fled three days- when lo!
before me stood Glaring the angry witch.
O Dis, even now, A clammy dew is beading on my brow, At mere remembering her pale laugh, and curse.
'Ha!
ha!
Sir Dainty!
there must be a nurse 'Made of rose leaves and thistledown, express, 'To cradle thee my sweet, and lull thee: yes, 'I am too flinty-hard for thy nice touch: 'My tenderest squeeze is but a giant's clutch.
'So, fairy-thing, it shall have lullabies 'Unheard of yet: and it shall still its cries 'Upon some breast more lilly-feminine.
'Oh, no- it shall not pine, and pine, and pine 'More than one pretty, trifling thousand years; 'And then 'twere pity, but fate's gentle shears 'Cut short its immortality.
Sea-flirt!
'Young dove of the waters!
truly I'll not hurt 'One hair of thine: see how I weep and sigh, 'That our heart-broken parting is so nigh.
'And must we part?
Ah, yes, it must be so.
'Yet ere thou leavest me in utter woe, 'Let me sob over thee my last adieus, 'And speak a blessing: Mark me!
Thou hast thews 'Immortal, for thou art of heavenly race: 'But such a love is mine, that here I chace 'Eternally away from thee all bloom 'Of youth, and destine thee towards a tomb.
'Hence shalt thou quickly to the watery vast; 'And there, ere many days be overpast, 'Disabled age shall seize thee; and even then 'Thou shalt not go the way of aged men; 'But live and wither, cripple and still breathe 'Ten hundred years: which gone, I then bequeath 'Thy fragile bones to unknown burial.
'Adieu, sweet love, adieu!'- As shot stars fall, She fled ere I could groan for mercy.
Stung And poison'd was my spirit: despair sung A war-song of defiance 'gainst all hell.
A hand was at my shoulder to compel My sullen steps; another 'fore my eyes Moved on with pointed finger.
In this guise Enforced, at the last by ocean's foam I found me; by my fresh, my native home.
Its tempering coolness, to my life akin, Came salutary as I waded in; And, with a blind voluptuous rage, I gave Battle to the swollen billow-ridge, and drave Large froth before me, while there yet remain'd Hale strength, nor from my bones all marrow drain'd.
"Young lover, I must weep- such hellish spite With dry cheek who can tell?
While thus my might Proving upon this element, dismay'd, Upon a dead thing's face my hand I laid; I look'd- 'twas Scylla!
Cursed, cursed Circe!
O vulture-witch, hast never heard of mercy?
Could not thy harshest vengeance be content, But thou must nip this tender innocent Because I lov'd her?- Cold, O cold indeed Were her fair limbs, and like a common weed The sea-swell took her hair.
Dead as she was I clung about her waist, nor ceas'd to pass Fleet as an arrow through unfathom'd brine, Until there shone a fabric crystalline, Ribb'd and inlaid with coral, pebble, and pearl.
Headlong I darted; at one eager swirl Gain'd its bright portal, enter'd, and behold!
'Twas vast, and desolate, and icy-cold; And all around- But wherefore this to thee Who in few minutes more thyself shalt see?- I left poor Scylla in a niche and fled.
My fever'd parchings up, my scathing dread Met palsy half way: soon these limbs became Gaunt, wither'd, sapless, feeble, cramp'd, and lame.
"Now let me pass a cruel, cruel space, Without one hope, without one faintest trace Of mitigation, or redeeming bubble Of colour'd phantasy; for I fear 'twould trouble Thy brain to loss of reason: and next tell How a restoring chance came down to quell One half of the witch in me.
"On a day, Sitting upon a rock above the spray, I saw grow up from the horizon's brink A gallant vessel: soon she seem'd to sink Away from me again, as though her course Had been resum'd in spite of hindering force- So vanish'd: and not long, before arose Dark clouds, and muttering of winds morose.
Old AEolus would stifle his mad spleen, But could not: therefore all the billows green Toss'd up the silver spume against the clouds.
The tempest came: I saw that vessel's shrouds In perilous bustle; while upon the deck Stood trembling creatures.
I beheld the wreck; The final gulphing; the poor struggling souls: I heard their cries amid loud thunder-rolls.
O they had all been sav'd but crazed eld Annull'd my vigorous cravings: and thus quell'd And curb'd, think on't, O Latmian!
did I sit Writhing with pity, and a cursing fit Against that hell-born Circe.
The crew had gone, By one and one, to pale oblivion; And I was gazing on the surges prone, With many a scalding tear and many a groan, When at my feet emerg'd an old man's hand, Grasping this scroll, and this same slender wand.
I knelt with pain- reach'd out my hand- had grasp'd These treasures- touch'd the knuckles- they unclasp'd- I caught a finger: but the downward weight O'erpowered me- it sank.
Then 'gan abate The storm, and through chill aguish gloom outburst The comfortable sun.
I was athirst To search the book, and in the warming air Parted its dripping leaves with eager care.
Strange matters did it treat of, and drew on My soul page after page, till well-nigh won Into forgetfulness; when, stupefied, I read these words, and read again, and tried My eyes against the heavens, and read again.
O what a load of misery and pain Each Atlas-line bore off!- a shine of hope Came gold around me, cheering me to cope Strenuous with hellish tyranny.
Attend!
For thou hast brought their promise to an end.
"In the wide sea there lives a forlorn wretch, Doom'd with enfeebled carcase to outstretch His loath'd existence through ten centuries, And then to die alone.
Who can devise A total opposition?
No one.
So One million times ocean must ebb and flow, And he oppressed.
Yet he shall not die, These things accomplish'd:- If he utterly Scans all the depths of magic, and expounds The meanings of all motions, shapes and sounds; If he explores all forms and substances Straight homeward to their symbol-essences; He shall not die.
Moreover, and in chief, He must pursue this task of joy and grief Most piously;- all lovers tempest-tost, And in the savage overwhelming lost, He shall deposit side by side, until Time's creeping shall the dreary space fulfil: Which done, and all these labours ripened, A youth, by heavenly power lov'd and led, Shall stand before him; whom he shall direct How to consummate all.
The youth elect Must do the thing, or both will be destroy'd."- "Then," cried the young Endymion, overjoy'd, "We are twin brothers in this destiny!
Say, I intreat thee, what achievement high Is, in this restless world, for me reserv'd.
What!
if from thee my wandering feet had swerv'd, Had we both perish'd?"- "Look!"
the sage replied, "Dost thou not mark a gleaming through the tide, Of diverse brilliances?
'tis the edifice I told thee of, where lovely Scylla lies; And where I have enshrined piously All lovers, whom fell storms have doom'd to die Throughout my bondage."
Thus discoursing, on They went till unobscur'd the porches shone; Which hurryingly they gain'd, and enter'd straight.
Sure never since king Neptune held his state Was seen such wonder underneath the stars.
Turn to some level plain where haughty Mars Has legion'd all his battle; and behold How every soldier, with firm foot, doth hold His even breast: see, many steeled squares, And rigid ranks of iron-whence who dares One step?
Imagine further, line by line, These warrior thousands on the field supine:- So in that crystal place, in silent rows, Poor lovers lay at rest from joys and woes.- The stranger from the mountains, breathless, trac'd Such thousands of shut eyes in order plac'd; Such ranges of white feet, and patient lips All ruddy,- for here death no blossom nips.
He mark'd their brows and foreheads; saw their hair Put sleekly on one side with nicest care; And each one's gentle wrists, with reverence, Put cross-wise to its heart.
"Let us commence," Whisper'd the guide, stuttering with joy, "even now."
He spake, and, trembling like an aspen-bough, Began to tear his scroll in pieces small, Uttering the while some mumblings funeral.
He tore it into pieces small as snow That drifts unfeather'd when bleak northerns blow; And having done it, took his dark blue cloak And bound it round Endymion: then struck His wand against the empty air times nine.- "What more there is to do, young man, is thine: But first a little patience; first undo This tangled thread, and wind it to a clue.
Ah, gentle!
'tis as weak as spider's skein; And shouldst thou break it- What, is it done so clean?
A power overshadows thee!
O, brave!
The spite of hell is tumbling to its grave.
Here is a shell; 'tis pearly blank to me, Nor mark'd with any sign or charactery- Canst thou read aught?
O read for pity's sake!
Olympus!
we are safe!
Now, Carian, break This wand against yon lyre on the pedestal."
'Twas done: and straight with sudden swell and fall Sweet music breath'd her soul away, and sigh'd A lullaby to silence.- "Youth!
now strew These minced leaves on me, and passing through Those files of dead, scatter the same around, And thou wilt see the issue."- 'Mid the sound Of flutes and viols, ravishing his heart, Endymion from Glaucus stood apart, And scatter'd in his face some fragments light.
How lightning-swift the change!
a youthful wight Smiling beneath a coral diadem, Out-sparkling sudden like an upturn'd gem, Appear'd, and, stepping to a beauteous corse, Kneel'd down beside it, and with tenderest force Press'd its cold hand, and wept,- and Scylla sigh'd!
Endymion, with quick hand, the charm applied- The nymph arose: he left them to their joy, And onward went upon his high employ, Showering those powerful fragments on the dead.
And, as he pass'd, each lifted up its head, As doth a flower at Apollo's touch.
Death felt it to his inwards: 'twas too much: Death fell a weeping in his charnel-house.
The Latmian persever'd along, and thus All were re-animated.
There arose A noise of harmony, pulses and throes Of gladness in the air- while many, who Had died in mutual arms devout and true, Sprang to each other madly; and the rest Felt a high certainty of being blest.
They gaz'd upon Endymion.
Enchantment Grew drunken, and would have its head and bent.
Delicious symphonies, like airy flowers, Budded, and swell'd, and, full-blown, shed full showers Of light, soft, unseen leaves of sounds divine.
The two deliverers tasted a pure wine Of happiness, from fairy-press ooz'd out.
Speechless they eyed each other, and about The fair assembly wander'd to and fro, Distracted with the richest overflow Of joy that ever pour'd from heaven.
-"Away!"
Shouted the new born god; "Follow, and pay Our piety to Neptunus supreme!"- Then Scylla, blushing sweetly from her dream, They led on first, bent to her meek surprise, Through portal columns of a giant size, Into the vaulted, boundless emerald.
Joyous all follow'd as the leader call'd, Down marble steps; pouring as easily As hour-glass sand,- and fast, as you might see Swallows obeying the south summer's call, Or swans upon a gentle waterfall.
Thus went that beautiful multitude, nor far, Ere from among some rocks of glittering spar, Just within ken, they saw descending thick Another multitude.
Whereat more quick Moved either host.
On a wide sand they met, And of those numbers every eye was wet; For each their old love found.
A murmuring rose, Like what was never heard in all the throes Of wind and waters: 'tis past human wit To tell; 'tis dizziness to think of it.
This mighty consummation made, the host Mov'd on for many a league; and gain'd, and lost Huge sea-marks; vanward swelling in array, And from the rear diminishing away,- Till a faint dawn surpris'd them.
Glaucus cried, "Behold!
behold, the palace of his pride!
God Neptune's palaces!"
With noise increas'd, They shoulder'd on towards that brightening east.
At every onward step proud domes arose In prospect,- diamond gleams, and golden glows Of amber 'gainst their faces levelling.
Joyous, and many as the leaves in spring, Still onward; still the splendour gradual swell'd.
Rich opal domes were seen, on high upheld By jasper pillars, letting through their shafts A blush of coral.
Copious wonder-draughts Each gazer drank; and deeper drank more near.
For what poor mortals fragment up, as mere As marble was there lavish, to the vast Of one fair palace, that far far surpass'd, Even for common bulk, those olden three, Memphis, and Babylon, and Nineveh.
As large, as bright, as colour'd as the bow Of Iris, when unfading it doth show Beyond a silvery shower, was the arch Through which this Paphian army took its march, Into the outer courts of Neptune's state: Whence could be seen, direct, a golden gate, To which the leaders sped; but not half raught Ere it burst open swift as fairy thought, And made those dazzled thousands veil their eyes Like callow eagles at the first sunrise.
Soon with an eagle nativeness their gaze Ripe from hue-golden swoons took all the blaze, And then, behold!
large Neptune on his throne Of emerald deep: yet not exalt alone; At his right hand stood winged Love, and on His left sat smiling Beauty's paragon.
Far as the mariner on highest mast Can see all round upon the calmed vast, So wide was Neptune's hall: and as the blue Doth vault the waters, so the waters drew Their doming curtains, high, magnificent, Aw'd from the throne aloof;- and when storm-rent Disclos'd the thunder-gloomings in Jove's air; But sooth'd as now, flash'd sudden everywhere, Noiseless, sub-marine cloudlets, glittering Death to a human eye: for there did spring From natural west, and east, and south, and north, A light as of four sunsets, blazing forth A gold-green zenith 'bove the Sea-God's head.
Of lucid depth the floor, and far outspread As breezeless lake, on which the slim canoe Of feather'd Indian darts about, as through The delicatest air: air verily, But for the portraiture of clouds and sky: This palace floor breath-air,- but for the amaze Of deep-seen wonders motionless,- and blaze Of the dome pomp, reflected in extremes, Globing a golden sphere.
They stood in dreams Till Triton blew his horn.
The palace rang; The Nereids danc'd; the Syrens faintly sang; And the great Sea-King bow'd his dripping head.
Then Love took wing, and from his pinions shed On all the multitude a nectarous dew.
The ooze-born Goddess beckoned and drew Fair Scylla and her guides to conference; And when they reach'd the throned eminence She kist the sea-nymph's cheek,- who sat her down A toying with the doves.
Then,- "Mighty crown And sceptre of this kingdom!"
Venus said, "Thy vows were on a time to Nais paid: Behold!"- Two copious tear-drops instant fell From the God's large eyes; he smil'd delectable, And over Glaucus held his blessing hands.- "Endymion!
Ah!
still wandering in the bands Of love?
Now this is cruel.
Since the hour I met thee in earth's bosom, all my power Have I put forth to serve thee.
What, not yet Escap'd from dull mortality's harsh net?
A little patience, youth!
'twill not be long, Or I am skilless quite: an idle tongue, A humid eye, and steps luxurious, Where these are new and strange, are ominous.
Aye, I have seen these signs in one of heaven, When others were all blind: and were I given To utter secrets, haply I might say Some pleasant words:- but Love will have his day.
So wait awhile expectant.
Pr'ythee soon, Even in the passing of thine honey-moon, Visit thou my Cythera: thou wilt find Cupid well-natured, my Adonis kind; And pray persuade with thee- Ah, I have done, All blisses be upon thee, my sweet son!"- Thus the fair goddess: While Endymion Knelt to receive those accents halcyon.
Meantime a glorious revelry began Before the Water-Monarch.
Nectar ran In courteous fountains to all cups outreach'd; And plunder'd vines, teeming exhaustless, pleach'd New growth about each shell and pendent lyre; The which, in disentangling for their fire, Pull'd down fresh foliage and coverture For dainty toying.
Cupid, empire-sure, Flutter'd and laugh'd, and oft-times through the throng Made a delightful way.
Then dance, and song, And garlanding grew wild; and pleasure reign'd.
In harmless tendril they each other chain'd, And strove who should be smother'd deepest in Fresh crush of leaves.
O 'tis a very sin For one so weak to venture his poor verse In such a place as this.
O do not curse, High Muses!
let him hurry to the ending.
All suddenly were silent.
A soft blending Of dulcet instruments came charmingly; And then a hymn.
"King of the stormy sea!
Brother of Jove, and co-inheritor Of elements!
Eternally before Thee the waves awful bow.
Fast, stubborn rock, At thy fear'd trident shrinking, doth unlock Its deep foundations, hissing into foam.
All mountain-rivers, lost in the wide home Of thy capacious bosom, ever flow.
Thou frownest, and old AEeolus thy foe Skulks to his cavern, 'mid the gruff complaint Of all his rebel tempests.
Dark clouds faint When, from thy diadem, a silver gleam Slants over blue dominion.
Thy bright team Gulphs in the morning light, and scuds along To bring thee nearer to that golden song Apollo singeth, while his chariot Waits at the doors of heaven.
Thou art not For scenes like this: an empire stern hast thou; And it hath furrow'd that large front: yet now, As newly come of heaven, dost thou sit To blend and interknit Subdued majesty with this glad time.
O shell-borne King sublime!
We lay our hearts before thee evermore- We sing, and we adore!
"Breathe softly, flutes; Be tender of your strings, ye soothing lutes; Nor be the trumpet heard!
O vain, O vain; Not flowers budding in an April rain, Nor breath of sleeping dove, nor river's flow,- No, nor the AEolian twang of Love's own bow, Can mingle music fit for the soft ear Of goddess Cytherea!
Yet deign, white Queen of Beauty, thy fair eyes On our souls' sacrifice.
"Bright-winged Child!
Who has another care when thou hast smil'd?
Unfortunates on earth, we see at last All death-shadows, and glooms that overcast Our spirits, fann'd away by thy light pinions.
O sweetest essence!
sweetest of all minions!
God of warm pulses, and dishevell'd hair, And panting bosoms bare!
Dear unseen light in darkness!
eclipser Of light in light!
delicious poisoner!
Thy venom'd goblet will we quaff until We fill- we fill!
And by thy Mother's lips-" Was heard no more For clamour, when the golden palace door Opened again, and from without, in shone A new magnificence.
On oozy throne Smooth-moving came Oceanus the old, To take a latest glimpse at his sheep-fold, Before he went into his quiet cave To muse for ever- Then a lucid wave, Scoop'd from its trembling sisters of mid-sea, Afloat, and pillowing up the majesty Of Doris, and the AEgean seer, her spouse- Next, on a dolphin, clad in laurel boughs, Theban Amphion leaning on his lute: His fingers went across it- All were mute To gaze on Amphitrite, queen of pearls, And Thetis pearly too.- The palace whirls Around giddy Endymion; seeing he Was there far strayed from mortality.
He could not bear it- shut his eyes in vain; Imagination gave a dizzier pain.
"O I shall die!
sweet Venus, be my stay!
Where is my lovely mistress?
Well-away!
I die- I hear her voice- I feel my wing-" At Neptune's feet he sank.
A sudden ring Of Nereids were about him, in kind strife To usher back his spirit into life: But still he slept.
At last they interwove Their cradling arms, and purpos'd to convey Towards a crystal bower far away.
Lo!
while slow carried through the pitying crowd, To his inward senses these words spake aloud; Written in star-light on the dark above: Dearest Endymion!
my entire love!
How have I dwelt in fear of fate: 'tis done- Immortal bliss for me too hast thou won.
Arise then!
for the hen-dove shall not hatch Her ready eggs, before I'll kissing snatch Thee into endless heaven.
Awake!
awake!
The youth at once arose: a placid lake Came quiet to his eyes; and forest green, Cooler than all the wonders he had seen, Lull'd with its simple song his fluttering breast.
How happy once again in grassy nest!
BOOK IV.
Muse of my native land!
loftiest Muse!
O first-born on the mountains!
by the hues Of heaven on the spiritual air begot: Long didst thou sit alone in northern grot, While yet our England was a wolfish den; Before our forests heard the talk of men; Before the first of Druids was a child;- Long didst thou sit amid our regions wild Rapt in a deep prophetic solitude.
There came an eastern voice of solemn mood Yet wast thou patient.
Then sang forth the Nine, Apollo's garland:- yet didst thou divine Such home-bred glory, that they cry'd in vain, "Come hither, Sister of the Island!"
Plain Spake fair Ausonia; and once more she spake A higher summons:- still didst thou betake Thee to thy native hopes.
O thou hast won A full accomplishment!
The thing is done, Which undone, these our latter days had risen On barren souls.
Great Muse, thou know'st what prison, Of flesh and bone, curbs, and confines, and frets Our spirit's wings: despondency besets Our pillows; and the fresh to-morrow morn Seems to give forth its light in very scorn Of our dull, uninspired, snail-paced lives.
Long have I said, how happy he who shrives To thee!
But then I thought on poets gone, And could not pray:- nor could I now- so on I move to the end in lowliness of heart.- "Ah, woe is me!
that I should fondly part From my dear native land!
Ah, foolish maid!
Glad was the hour, when, with thee, myriads bade Adieu to Ganges and their pleasant fields!
To one so friendless the clear freshet yields A bitter coolness; the ripe grape is sour: Yet I would have, great gods!
but one short hour Of native air- let me but die at home."
Endymion to heaven's airy dome Was offering up a hecatomb of vows, When these words reach'd him.
Whereupon he bows His head through thorny-green entanglement Of underwood, and to the sound is bent, Anxious as hind towards her hidden fawn.
"Is no one near to help me?
No fair dawn Of life from charitable voice?
No sweet saying To set my dull and sadden'd spirit playing?
No hand to toy with mine?
No lips so sweet That I may worship them?
No eyelids meet To twinkle on my bosom?
No one dies Before me, till from these enslaving eyes Redemption sparkles!- I am sad and lost."
Thou, Carian lord, hadst better have been tost Into a whirlpool.
Vanish into air, Warm mountaineer!
for canst thou only bear A woman's sigh alone and in distress?
See not her charms!
Is Phoebe passionless?
Phoebe is fairer far- O gaze no more:- Yet if thou wilt behold all beauty's store, Behold her panting in the forest grass!
Do not those curls of glossy jet surpass For tenderness the arms so idly lain Amongst them?
Feelest not a kindred pain, To see such lovely eyes in swimming search After some warm delight, that seems to perch Dovelike in the dim cell lying beyond Their upper lids?- Hist!
"O for Hermes' wand, To touch this flower into human shape!
That woodland Hyacinthus could escape From his green prison, and here kneeling down Call me his queen, his second life's fair crown!
Ah me, how I could love!- My soul doth melt For the unhappy youth- Love!
I have felt So faint a kindness, such a meek surrender To what my own full thoughts had made too tender, That but for tears my life had fled away!- Ye deaf and senseless minutes of the day, And thou, old forest, hold ye this for true, There is no lightning, no authentic dew But in the eye of love: there's not a sound, Melodious howsoever, can confound The heavens and earth in one to such a death As doth the voice of love: there's not a breath Will mingle kindly with the meadow air, Till it has panted round, and stolen a share Of passion from the heart!"- Upon a bough He leant, wretched.
He surely cannot now Thirst for another love: O impious, That he can ever dream upon it thus!- Thought he, "Why am I not as are the dead, Since to a woe like this I have been led Through the dark earth, and through the wondrous sea?
Goddess!
I love thee not the less: from thee By Juno's smile I turn not- no, no, no- While the great waters are at ebb and flow.- I have a triple soul!
O fond pretence- For both, for both my love is so immense, I feel my heart is cut for them in twain."
And so he groan'd, as one by beauty slain.
The lady's heart beat quick, and he could see Her gentle bosom heave tumultuously.
He sprang from his green covert: there she lay, Sweet as a muskrose upon new-made hay; With all her limbs on tremble, and her eyes Shut softly up alive.
To speak he tries.
"Fair damsel, pity me!
forgive that I Thus violate thy bower's sanctity!
O pardon me, for I am full of grief- Grief born of thee, young angel!
fairest thief!
Who stolen hast away the wings wherewith I was to top the heavens.
Dear maid, sith Thou art my executioner, and I feel Loving and hatred, misery and weal, Will in a few short hours be nothing to me, And all my story that much passion slew me; Do smile upon the evening of my days: And, for my tortur'd brain begins to craze, Be thou my nurse; and let me understand How dying I shall kiss that lilly hand.- Dost weep for me?
Then should I be content.
Scowl on, ye fates!
until the firmament Outblackens Erebus, and the full-cavern'd earth Crumbles into itself.
By the cloud girth Of Jove, those tears have given me a thirst To meet oblivion."- As her heart would burst The maiden sobb'd awhile, and then replied: "Why must such desolation betide As that thou speak'st of?
Are not these green nooks Empty of all misfortune?
Do the brooks Utter a gorgon voice?
Does yonder thrush, Schooling its half-fledg'd little ones to brush About the dewy forest, whisper tales?- Speak not of grief, young stranger, or cold snails Will slime the rose to night.
Though if thou wilt, Methinks 'twould be a guilt- a very guilt- Not to companion thee, and sigh away The light- the dusk- the dark- till break of day!"
"Dear lady," said Endymion, "'tis past: I love thee!
and my days can never last.
That I may pass in patience still speak: Let me have music dying, and I seek No more delight- I bid adieu to all.
Didst thou not after other climates call, And murmur about Indian streams?"- Then she, Sitting beneath the midmost forest tree, For pity sang this roundelay- "O Sorrow, Why dost borrow The natural hue of health, from vermeil lips?- To give maiden blushes To the white rose bushes?
Or is't thy dewy hand the daisy tips?
"O Sorrow, Why dost borrow The lustrous passion from a falcon-eye?- To give the glow-worm light?
Or, on a moonless night, To tinge, on syren shores, the salt sea-spry "O Sorrow, Why dost borrow The mellow ditties from a mourning tongue?- To give at evening pale Unto the nightingale, That thou mayst listen the cold dews among?
"O Sorrow, Why dost borrow Heart's lightness from the merriment of May?- A lover would not tread A cowslip on the head, Though he should dance from eve till peep of day- Nor any drooping flower Held sacred for thy bower, Wherever he may sport himself and play.
"To Sorrow, I bade good-morrow, And thought to leave her far away behind; But cheerly, cheerly, She loves me dearly; She is so constant to me, and so kind: I would deceive her And so leave her, But ah!
she is so constant and so kind.
"Beneath my palm trees, by the river side, I sat a weeping: in the whole world wide There was no one to ask me why I wept,- And so I kept Brimming the water-lilly cups with tears Cold as my fears.
"Beneath my palm trees, by the river side, I sat a weeping: what enamour'd bride, Cheated by shadowy wooer from the clouds, But hides and shrouds Beneath dark palm trees by a river side?
"And as I sat, over the light blue hills There came a noise of revellers: the rills Into the wide stream came of purple hue- 'Twas Bacchus and his crew!
The earnest trumpet spake, and silver thrills From kissing cymbals made a merry din- 'Twas Bacchus and his kin!
Like to a moving vintage down they came, Crown'd with green leaves, and faces all on flame; All madly dancing through the pleasant valley, To scare thee, Melancholy!
O then, O then, thou wast a simple name!
And I forgot thee, as the berried holly By shepherds is forgotten, when, in June, Tall chesnuts keep away the sun and moon:- I rush'd into the folly!
"Within his car, aloft, young Bacchus stood, Trifling his ivy-dart, in dancing mood, With sidelong laughing; And little rills of crimson wine imbrued His plump white arms, and shoulders, enough white For Venus' pearly bite: And near him rode Silenus on his ass, Pelted with flowers as he on did pass Tipsily quaffing.
"Whence came ye, merry Damsels!
whence came ye!
So many, and so many, and such glee?
Why have ye left your bowers desolate, Your lutes and gentler fate?- 'We follow Bacchus!
Bacchus on the wing, A conquering!
Bacchus, young Bacchus!
good or ill betide, We dance before him thorough kingdoms wide Come hither, lady fair, and joined be To our wild minstrelsy!'
"Whence came ye, jolly Satyrs!
whence came ye!
So many, and so many, and such glee?
Why have ye left your forest haunts, why left Your nuts in oak-tree cleft?- 'For wine, for wine we left our kernel tree; For wine we left our heath, and yellow brooms, And cold mushrooms; For wine we follow Bacchus through the earth; Great God of breathless cups and chirping mirth!- Come hither, lady fair, and joined be To our mad minstrelsy!'
"Over wide streams and mountains great we went, And, save when Bacchus kept his ivy tent, Onward the tiger and the leopard pants, With Asian elephants: Onward these myriads- with song and dance, With zebras striped, and sleek Arabians' prance, Web-footed alligators, crocodiles, Bearing upon their scaly backs, in files, Plump infant laughers mimicking the coil Of seamen, and stout galley-rowers' toil: With toying oars and silken sails they glide, Nor care for wind and tide.
"Mounted on panthers' furs and lions' manes, From rear to van they scour about the plains; A three days' journey in a moment done: And always, at the rising of the sun, About the wilds they hunt with spear and horn, On spleenful unicorn.
"I saw Osirian Egypt kneel adown Before the vine-wreath crown!
I saw parch'd Abyssinia rouse and sing To the silver cymbals' ring!
I saw the whelming vintage hotly pierce Old Tartary the fierce!
The kings of Inde their jewel-sceptres vail, And from their treasures scatter pearled hail; Great Brahma from his mystic heaven groans, And all his priesthood moans; Before young Bacchus' eye-wink turning pale.- Into these regions came I following him, Sick hearted, weary- so I took a whim To stray away into these forests drear Alone, without a peer: And I have told thee all thou mayest hear.
"Young stranger!
I've been a ranger In search of pleasure throughout every clime: Alas, 'tis not for me!
Bewitch'd I sure must be, To lose in grieving all my maiden prime.
"Come then, Sorrow!
Sweetest Sorrow!
Like an own babe I nurse thee on my breast: I thought to leave thee And deceive thee, But now of all the world I love thee best.
"There is not one, No, no, not one But thee to comfort a poor lonely maid; Thou art her mother, And her brother, Her playmate, and her wooer in the shade."
O what a sigh she gave in finishing, And look, quite dead to every worldly thing!
Endymion could not speak, but gazed on her; And listened to the wind that now did stir About the crisped oaks full drearily, Yet with as sweet a softness as might be Remember'd from its velvet summer song.
At last he said: "Poor lady, how thus long Have I been able to endure that voice?
Fair Melody!
kind Syren!
I've no choice; I must be thy sad servant evermore: I cannot choose but kneel here and adore.
Alas, I must not think- by Phoebe, no!
Let me not think, soft Angel!
shall it be so?
Say, beautifullest, shall I never think?
O thou could'st foster me beyond the brink Of recollection!
make my watchful care Close up its bloodshot eyes, nor see despair!
Do gently murder half my soul, and Shall feel the other half so utterly!- I'm giddy at that cheek so fair and smooth; O let it blush so ever!
let it soothe My madness!
let it mantle rosy-warm With the tinge of love, panting in safe alarm.- This cannot be thy hand, and yet it is; And this is sure thine other softling- this Thine own fair bosom, and I am so near!
Wilt fall asleep?
O let me sip that tear!
And whisper one sweet word that I may know This is this world- sweet dewy blossom!"- Woe!
Woe!
Woe to that Endymion!
Where is he?- Even these words went echoing dismally Through the wide forest- a most fearful tone, Like one repenting in his latest moan; And while it died away a shade pass'd by, As of a thunder cloud.
When arrows fly Through the thick branches, poor ring-doves sleek forth Their timid necks and tremble; so these both Leant to each other trembling, and sat so Waiting for some destruction- when lo, Foot-feather'd Mercury appear'd sublime Beyond the tall tree tops; and in less time Than shoots the slanted hail-storm, down he dropt Towards the ground; but rested not, nor stopt One moment from his home: only the sward He with his wand light touch'd, and heavenward Swifter than sight was gone- even before The teeming earth a sudden witness bore Of his swift magic.
Diving swans appear Above the crystal circlings white and clear; And catch the cheated eye in wide surprise, How they can dive in sight and unseen rise- So from the turf outsprang two steeds jet-black, Each with large dark blue wings upon his back.
The youth of Caria plac'd the lovely dame On one, and felt himself in spleen to tame The other's fierceness.
Through the air they flew, High as the eagles.
Like two drops of dew Exhal'd to Phoebus' lips, away they are gone, Far from the earth away- unseen, alone, Among cool clouds and winds, but that the free, The buoyant life of song can floating be Above their heads, and follow them untir'd.- Muse of my native land, am I inspir'd?
This is the giddy air, and I must spread Wide pinions to keep here; nor do I dread Or height, or depth, or width, or any chance Precipitous: I have beneath my glance Those towering horses and their mournful freight.
Could I thus sail, and see, and thus await Fearless for power of thought, without thine aid?- There is a sleepy dusk, an odorous shade From some approaching wonder, and behold Those winged steeds, with snorting nostrils bold Snuff at its faint extreme, and seem to tire, Dying to embers from their native fire!
There curl'd a purple mist around them; soon, It seem'd as when around the pale new moon Sad Zephyr droops the clouds like weeping willow: 'Twas Sleep slow journeying with head on pillow.
For the first time, since he came nigh dead born From the old womb of night, his cave forlorn Had he left more forlorn; for the first time, He felt aloof the day and morning's prime- Because into his depth Cimmerian There came a dream, showing how a young man, Ere a lean bat could plump its wintery skin, Would at high Jove's empyreal footstool win An immortality, and how espouse Jove's daughter, and be reckon'd of his house.
Now was he slumbering towards heaven's gate, That he might at the threshold one hour wait To hear the marriage melodies, and then Sink downward to his dusky cave again.
His litter of smooth semilucent mist, Diversely ting'd with rose and amethyst, Puzzled those eyes that for the centre sought; And scarcely for one moment could be caught His sluggish form reposing motionless.
Those two on winged steeds, with all the stress Of vision search'd for him, as one would look Athwart the sallows of a river nook To catch a glance at silver-throated eels,- Or from old Skiddaw's top, when fog conceals His rugged forehead in a mantle pale, With an eye-guess towards some pleasant vale Descry a favourite hamlet faint and far.
These raven horses, though they foster'd are Of earth's splenetic fire, dully drop Their full-vein'd ears, nostrils blood wide, and stop; Upon the spiritless mist have they outspread Their ample feathers, are in slumber dead,- And on those pinions, level in mid air, Endymion sleepeth and the lady fair.
Slowly they sail, slowly as icy isle Upon a calm sea drifting: and meanwhile The mournful wanderer dreams.
Behold!
he walks On heaven's pavement; brotherly he talks To divine powers: from his hand full fain Juno's proud birds are pecking pearly grain: He tries the nerve of Phoebus' golden bow, And asketh where the golden apples grow: Upon his arm he braces Pallas' shield, And strives in vain to unsettle and wield A Jovian thunderbolt: arch Hebe brings A full-brimm'd goblet, dances lightly, sings And tantalizes long; at last he drinks, And lost in pleasure at her feet he sinks, Touching with dazzled lips her starlight hand.
He blows a bugle,- an ethereal band Are visible above: the Seasons four,- Green-kyrtled Spring, flush Summer, golden store In Autumn's sickle, Winter frosty hoar, Join dance with shadowy Hours; while still the blast In swells unmitigated, still doth last To sway their floating morris.
"Whose is this?
Whose bugle?"
he inquires; they smile- "O Dis!
Why is this mortal here?
Dost thou not know Its mistress' lips?
Not thou?- 'Tis Dian's: lo!
She rises crescented!"
He looks, 'tis she, His very goddess; good-bye earth, and sea, And air, and pains, and care, and suffering; Good-bye to all but love!
Then doth he spring Towards her, and awakes- and, strange, o'erhead, Of those same fragrant exhalations bred, Beheld awake his very dream: the gods Stood smiling; merry Hebe laughs and nods; And Phoebe bends towards him crescented.
O state perplexing!
On the pinion bed, Too well awake, he feels the panting side Of his delicious lady.
He who died For soaring too audacious in the sun, When that same treacherous wax began to run, Felt not more tongue-tied than Endymion.
His heart leapt up as to its rightful throne, To that fair shadow'd passion puls'd its way- Ah, what perplexity!
Ah, well a day!
So fond, so beauteous was his bed-fellow, He could not help but kiss her: then he grew Awhile forgetful of all beauty save Young Phoebe's, golden hair'd; and so 'gan crave Forgiveness: yet he turn'd once more to look At the sweet sleeper,- all his soul was shook,- She press'd his hand in slumber; so once more He could not help but kiss her and adore.
At this the shadow wept, melting away.
The Latmian started up: "Bright goddess, stay!
Search my most hidden breast!
By truth's own tongue, I have no daedale heart: why is it wrung To desperation?
Is there nought for me, Upon the bourne of bliss, but misery?"
These words awoke the stranger of dark tresses: Her dawning love-look rapt Endymion blesses With 'haviour soft.
Sleep yawn'd from underneath.
"Thou swan of Ganges, let us no more breathe This murky phantasm!
thou contented seem'st Pillow'd in lovely idleness, nor dream'st What horrors may discomfort thee and me.
Ah, shouldst thou die from my heart-treachery!- Yet did she merely weep- her gentle soul Hath no revenge in it: as it is whole In tenderness, would I were whole in love!
Can I prize thee, fair maid, all price above, Even when I feel as true as innocence?
I do, I do.- What is this soul then?
Whence Came it?
It does not seem my own, and I Have no self-passion or identity.
Some fearful end must be: where, where is it?
By Nemesis, I see my spirit flit Alone about the dark- Forgive me, sweet: Shall we away?"
He rous'd the steeds: they beat Their wings chivalrous into the clear air, Leaving old Sleep within his vapoury lair.
The good-night blush of eve was waning slow, And Vesper, risen star, began to throe In the dusk heavens silverly, when they Thus sprang direct towards the Galaxy.
Nor did speed hinder converse soft and strange- Eternal oaths and vows they interchange, In such wise, in such temper, so aloof Up in the winds, beneath a starry roof, So witless of their doom, that verily 'Tis well nigh past man's search their hearts to see; Whether they wept, or laugh'd, or griev'd, or toy'd- Most like with joy gone mad, with sorrow cloy'd.
Full facing their swift flight, from ebon streak, The moon put forth a little diamond peak, No bigger than an unobserved star, Or tiny point of fairy scymetar; Bright signal that she only stoop'd to tie Her silver sandals, ere deliciously She bow'd into the heavens her timid head.
Slowly she rose, as though she would have fled, While to his lady meek the Carian turn'd, To mark if her dark eyes had yet discern'd This beauty in its birth- Despair!
despair!
He saw her body fading gaunt and spare In the cold moonshine.
Straight he seiz'd her wrist; It melted from his grasp: her hand he kiss'd, And, horror!
kiss'd his own- he was alone.
Her steed a little higher soar'd, and then Dropt hawkwise to the earth.
There lies a den, Beyond the seeming confines of the space Made for the soul to wander in and trace Its own existence, of remotest glooms.
Dark regions are around it, where the tombs Of buried griefs the spirit sees, but scarce One hour doth linger weeping, for the pierce Of new-born woe it feels more inly smart: And in these regions many a venom'd dart At random flies; they are the proper home Of every ill: the man is yet to come Who hath not journeyed in this native hell.
But few have ever felt how calm and well Sleep may be had in that deep den of all.
There anguish does not sting; nor pleasure pall: Woe-hurricanes beat ever at the gate, Yet all is still within and desolate.
Beset with plainful gusts, within ye hear No sound so loud as when on curtain'd bier The death-watch tick is stifled.
Enter none Who strive therefore: on the sudden it is won.
Just when the sufferer begins to burn, Then it is free to him; and from an urn, Still fed by melting ice, he takes a draught- Young Semele such richness never quaft In her maternal longing!
Happy gloom!
Dark Paradise!
where pale becomes the bloom Of health by due; where silence dreariest Is most articulate; where hopes infest; Where those eyes are the brightest far that keep Their lids shut longest in a dreamless sleep.
O happy spirit- home!
O wondrous soul!
Pregnant with such a den to save the whole In thine own depth.
Hail, gentle Carian!
For, never since thy griefs and woes began, Hast thou felt so content: a grievous feud Hath led thee to this Cave of Quietude.
Aye, his lull'd soul was there, although upborne With dangerous speed: and so he did not mourn Because he knew not whither he was going.
So happy was he, not the aerial blowing Of trumpets at clear parley from the east Could rouse from that fine relish, that high feast.
They stung the feather'd horse: with fierce alarm He flapp'd towards the sound.
Alas, no charm Could lift Endymion's head, or he had view'd A skyey mask, a pinion'd multitude,- And silvery was its passing: voices sweet Warbling the while as if to lull and greet The wanderer in his path.
Thus warbled they, While past the vision went in bright array.
"Who, who from Dian's feast would be away?
For all the golden bowers of the day Are empty left?
Who, who away would be From Cynthia's wedding and festivity?
Not Hesperus: lo!
upon his silver wings He leans away for highest heaven and sings, Snapping his lucid fingers merrily!- Ah, Zephyrus!
art here, and Flora too!
Ye tender bibbers of the rain and dew, Young playmates of the rose and daffodil, Be careful, ere ye enter in, to fill Your baskets high With fennel green, and balm, and golden pines, Savory, latter-mint, and columbines, Cool parsley, basil sweet, and sunny thyme; Yea, every flower and leaf of every clime, All gather'd in the dewy morning: hie Away!
fly, fly!- Crystalline brother of the belt of heaven, Aquarius!
to whom king Jove has given Two liquid pulse streams 'stead of feather'd wings, Two fan-like fountains,- thine illuminings For Dian play: Dissolve the frozen purity of air; Let thy white shoulders silvery and bare Show cold through water pinions; make more bright The Star-Queen's crescent on her marriage night: Haste, haste away!- Castor has tamed the planet Lion, see!
And of the Bear has Pollux mastery: A third is in the race!
who is the third Speeding away swift as the eagle bird?
The ramping Centaur!
The Lion's mane's on end: the Bear how fierce!
The Centaur's arrow ready seems to pierce Some enemy: far forth his bow is bent Into the blue of heaven.
He'll be shent, Pale unrelentor, When he shall hear the wedding lutes a playing.- Andromeda!
sweet woman!
why delaying So timidly among the stars: come hither!
Join this bright throng, and nimbly follow whither They all are going.
Danae's Son, before Jove newly bow'd, Has wept for thee, calling to Jove aloud.
Thee, gentle lady, did he disenthral: Ye shall for ever live and love, for all Thy tears are flowing.- By Daphne's fright, behold Apollo!-" More Endymion heard not: down his steed him bore, Prone to the green head of a misty hill.
His first touch of the earth went nigh to kill.
"Alas!"
said he, "were I but always borne Through dangerous winds, had but my footsteps worn A path in hell, for ever would I bless Horrors which nourish an uneasiness For my own sullen conquering: to him Who lives beyond earth's boundary, grief is dim, Sorrow is but a shadow: now I see The grass; I feel the solid ground- Ah, me!
It is thy voice- divinest!
Where?- who?
who Left thee so quiet on this bed of dew?
Behold upon this happy earth we are; Let us aye love each other; let us fare On forest-fruits, and never, never go Among the abodes of mortals here below, Or be by phantoms duped.
O destiny!
Into a labyrinth now my soul would fly, But with thy beauty will I deaden it.
Where didst thou melt to?
By thee will I sit For ever: let our fate stop here- a kid I on this spot will offer: Pan will bid Us live in peace, in love and peace among His forest wildernesses.
I have clung To nothing, lov'd a nothing, nothing seen Or felt but a great dream!
O I have been Presumptuous against love, against the sky, Against all elements, against the tie Of mortals each to each, against the blooms Of flowers, rush of rivers, and the tombs Of heroes gone!
Against his proper glory Has my own soul conspired: so my story Will I to children utter, and repent.
There never liv'd a mortal man, who bent His appetite beyond his natural sphere, But starv'd and died.
My sweetest Indian, here, Here will I kneel, for thou redeemed hast My life from too thin breathing: gone and past Are cloudy phantasms.
Caverns lone, farewell!
And air of visions, and the monstrous swell Of visionary seas!
No, never more Shall airy voices cheat me to the shore Of tangled wonder, breathless and aghast.
Adieu, my daintiest Dream!
although so vast My love is still for thee.
The hour may come When we shall meet in pure elysium.
On earth I may not love thee; and therefore Doves will I offer up, and sweetest store All through the teeming year: so thou wilt shine On me, and on this damsel fair of mine, And bless our silver lives.
My Indian bliss!
My river-lilly bud!
one human kiss!
One sigh of real breath- one gentle squeeze, Warm as a dove's nest among summer trees, And warm with dew at ooze from living blood!
Whither didst melt?
Ah, what of that!- all good We'll talk about- no more of dreaming.- Now, Where shall our dwelling be?
Under the brow Of some steep mossy hill, where ivy dun Would hide us up, although spring leaves were none; And where dark yew trees, as we rustle through, Will drop their scarlet berry cups of dew?
O thou wouldst joy to live in such a place; Dusk for our loves, yet light enough to grace Those gentle limbs on mossy bed reclin'd: For by one step the blue sky shouldst thou find, And by another, in deep dell below, See, through the trees, a little river go All in its mid-day gold and glimmering.
Honey from out the gnarled hive I'll bring, And apples, wan with sweetness, gather thee,- Cresses that grow where no man may them see, And sorrel untorn by the dew-claw'd stag: Pipes will I fashion of the syrinx flag, That thou mayst always know whither I roam, When it shall please thee in our quiet home To listen and think of love.
Still let me speak; Still let me dive into the joy I seek,- For yet the past doth prison me.
The rill, Thou haply mayst delight in, will I fill With fairy fishes from the mountain tarn, And thou shalt feed them from the squirrel's barn.
Its bottom will I strew with amber shells, And pebbles blue from deep enchanted wells.
Its sides I'll plant with dew-sweet eglantine, And honeysuckles full of clear bee-wine.
I will entice this crystal rill to trace Love's silver name upon the meadow's face.
I'll kneel to Vesta, for a flame of fire; And to god Phoebus, for a golden lyre; To Empress Dian, for a hunting spear; To Vesper, for a taper silver-clear, That I may see thy beauty through the night; To Flora, and a nightingale shall light Tame on thy finger; to the River-gods, And they shall bring thee taper fishing-rods Of gold, and lines of Naiads' long bright tress.
Heaven shield thee for thine utter loveliness!
Thy mossy footstool shall the altar be 'Fore which I'll bend, bending, dear love, to thee: Those lips shall be my Delphos, and shall speak Laws to my footsteps, colour to my cheek, Trembling or stedfastness to this same voice, And of three sweetest pleasurings the choice: And that affectionate light, those diamond things, Those eyes, those passions, those supreme pearl springs, Shall be my grief, or twinkle me to pleasure.
Say, is not bliss within our perfect seisure?
O that I could not doubt!"
The mountaineer Thus strove by fancies vain and crude to clear His briar'd path to some tranquillity.
It gave bright gladness to his lady's eye, And yet the tears she wept were tears of sorrow; Answering thus, just as the golden morrow Beam'd upward from the vallies of the east: "O that the flutter of this heart had ceas'd, Or the sweet name of love had pass'd away.
Young feather'd tyrant!
by a swift decay Wilt thou devote this body to the earth: And I do think that at my very birth I lisp'd thy blooming titles inwardly; For at the first, first dawn and thought of thee, With uplift hands I blest the stars of heaven.
Art thou not cruel?
Ever have I striven To think thee kind, but ah, it will not do!
When yet a child, I heard that kisses drew Favour from thee, and so I kisses gave To the void air, bidding them find out love: But when I came to feel how far above All fancy, pride, and fickle maidenhood, All earthly pleasure, all imagin'd good, Was the warm tremble of a devout kiss,- Even then, that moment, at the thought of this, Fainting I fell into a bed of flowers, And languish'd there three days.
Ye milder powers, Am I not cruelly wrong'd?
Believe, believe Me, dear Endymion, were I to weave With my own fancies garlands of sweet life, Thou shouldst be one of all.
Ah, bitter strife!
I may not be thy love: I am forbidden- Indeed I am- thwarted, affrighted, chidden, By things I trembled at, and gorgon wrath.
Twice hast thou ask'd whither I went: henceforth Ask me no more!
I may not utter it, Nor may I be thy love.
We might commit Ourselves at once to vengeance; we might die; We might embrace and die: voluptuous thought!
Enlarge not to my hunger, or I'm caught In trammels of perverse deliciousness.
No, no, that shall not be: thee will I bless, And bid a long adieu."
The Carian No word return'd: both lovelorn, silent, wan, Into the vallies green together went.
Far wandering, they were perforce content To sit beneath a fair lone beechen tree; Nor at each other gaz'd, but heavily Por'd on its hazle cirque of shedded leaves.
Endymion!
unhappy!
it nigh grieves Me to behold thee thus in last extreme: Ensky'd ere this, but truly that I deem Truth the best music in a first-born song.
Thy lute-voic'd brother will I sing ere long, And thou shalt aid- hast thou not aided me?
Yes, moonlight Emperor!
felicity Has been thy meed for many thousand years; Yet often have I, on the brink of tears, Mourn'd as if yet thou wert a forester;- Forgetting the old tale.
He did not stir His eyes from the dead leaves, or one small pulse Of joy he might have felt.
The spirit culls Unfaded amaranth, when wild it strays Through the old garden-ground of boyish days.
A little onward ran the very stream By which he took his first soft poppy dream; And on the very bark 'gainst which he leant A crescent he had carv'd, and round it spent His skill in little stars.
The teeming tree Had swollen and green'd the pious charactery, But not ta'en out.
Why, there was not a slope Up which he had not fear'd the antelope; And not a tree, beneath whose rooty shade He had not with his tamed leopards play'd: Nor could an arrow light, or javelin, Fly in the air where his had never been- And yet he knew it not.
O treachery!
Why does his lady smile, pleasing her eye With all his sorrowing?
He sees her not.
But who so stares on him?
His sister sure!
Peona of the woods!- Can she endure- Impossible- how dearly they embrace!
His lady smiles; delight is in her face; It is no treachery.
"Dear brother mine!
Endymion, weep not so!
Why shouldst thou pine When all great Latmos so exalt will be?
Thank the great gods, and look not bitterly; And speak not one pale word, and sigh no more.
Sure I will not believe thou hast such store Of grief, to last thee to my kiss again.
Thou surely canst not bear a mind in pain, Come hand in hand with one so beautiful.
Be happy both of you!
for I will pull The flowers of autumn for your coronals.
Pan's holy priest for young Endymion calls; And when he is restor'd, thou, fairest dame, Shalt be our queen.
Now, is it not a shame To see ye thus,- not very, very sad?
Perhaps ye are too happy to be glad: O feel as if it were a common day; Free-voic'd as one who never was away.
No tongue shall ask, whence come ye?
but ye shall Be gods of your own rest imperial.
Not even I, for one whole month, will pry Into the hours that have pass'd us by, Since in my arbour I did sing to thee.
O Hermes!
on this very night will be A hymning up to Cynthia, queen of light; For the soothsayers old saw yesternight Good visions in the air,- whence will befal, As say these sages, health perpetual To shepherds and their flocks; and furthermore, In Dian's face they read the gentle lore: Therefore for her these vesper-carols are.
Our friends will all be there from nigh and far.
Many upon thy death have ditties made; And many, even now, their foreheads shade With cypress, on a day of sacrifice.
New singing for our maids shalt thou devise, And pluck the sorrow from our huntsmen's brows.
Tell me, my lady-queen, how to espouse This wayward brother to his rightful joys!
His eyes are on thee bent, as thou didst poize His fate most goddess-like.
Help me, I pray, To lure- Endymion, dear brother, say What ails thee?"
He could bear no more, and so Bent his soul fiercely like a spiritual bow, And twang'd it inwardly, and calmly said: "I would have thee my only friend, sweet maid!
My only visitor!
not ignorant though, That those deceptions which for pleasure go 'Mong men, are pleasures real as real may be: But there are higher ones I may not see, If impiously an earthly realm I take.
Since I saw thee, I have been wide awake Night after night, and day by day, until Of the empyrean I have drunk my fill.
Let it content thee, Sister, seeing me More happy than betides mortality.
A hermit young, I'll live in mossy cave, Where thou alone shalt come to me, and lave Thy spirit in the wonders I shall tell.
Through me the shepherd realm shall prosper well; For to thy tongue will I all health confide.
And, for my sake, let this young maid abide With thee as a dear sister.
Thou alone, Peona, mayst return to me.
I own This may sound strangely: but when, dearest girl, Thou seest it for my happiness, no pearl Will trespass down those cheeks.
Companion fair!
Wilt be content to dwell with her, to share This sister's love with me?"
Like one resign'd And bent by circumstance, and thereby blind In self-commitment, thus that meek unknown: "Aye, but a buzzing by my ears has flown, Of jubilee to Dian:- truth I heard?
Well then, I see there is no little bird, Tender soever, but is Jove's own care, Long have I sought for rest, and, unaware, Behold I find it!
so exalted too!
So after my own heart!
I knew, I knew There was a place untenanted in it: In that same void white Chastity shall sit, And monitor me nightly to lone slumber.
With sanest lips I vow me to the number Of Dian's sisterhood; and, kind lady, With thy good help, this very night shall see My future days to her fane consecrate."
As feels a dreamer what doth most create His own particular fright, so these three felt: Or like one who, in after ages, knelt To Lucifer or Baal, when he'd pine After a little sleep: or when in mine Far under-ground, a sleeper meets his friends Who know him not.
Each diligently bends Towards common thoughts and things for very fear; Striving their ghastly malady to cheer, By thinking it a thing of yes and no, That housewives talk of.
But the spirit-blow Was struck, and all were dreamers.
At the last Endymion said: "Are not our fates all cast?
Why stand we here?
Adieu, ye tender pair!
Adieu!"
Whereat those maidens, with wild stare, Walk'd dizzily away.
Pained and hot His eyes went after them, until they got Near to a cypress grove, whose deadly maw, In one swift moment, would what then he saw Engulph for ever.
"Stay!"
he cried, "ah, stay!
Turn, damsels!
hist!
one word I have to say.
Sweet Indian, I would see thee once again.
It is a thing I dote on: so I'd fain, Peona, ye should hand in hand repair Into those holy groves, that silent are Behind great Dian's temple.
I'll be yon, At Vesper's earliest twinkle- they are gone- But once, once, once again-" At this he press'd His hands against his face, and then did rest His head upon a mossy hillock green, And so remain'd as he a corpse had been All the long day; save when he scantly lifted His eyes abroad, to see how shadows shifted With the slow move of time,- sluggish and weary Until the poplar tops, in journey dreary, Had reach'd the river's brim.
Then up he rose, And, slowly as that very river flows, Walk'd towards the temple grove with this lament: "Why such a golden eve?
The breeze is sent Careful and soft, that not a leaf may fall Before the serene father of them all Bows down his summer head below the west.
Now am I of breath, speech, and speed possest, But at the setting I must bid adieu To her for the last time.
Night will strew On the damp grass myriads of lingering leaves, And with them shall I die; nor much it grieves To die, when summer dies on the cold sward.
Why, I have been a butterfly, a lord Of flowers, garlands, love-knots, silly posies, Groves, meadows, melodies, and arbour roses; My kingdom's at its death, and just it is That I should die with it: so in all this We miscall grief, bale, sorrow, heartbreak, woe, What is there to plain of?
By Titan's foe I am but rightly serv'd."
So saying, he Tripp'd lightly on, in sort of deathful glee; Laughing at the clear stream and setting sun, As though they jests had been: nor had he done His laugh at nature's holy countenance, Until that grove appear'd, as if perchance, And then his tongue with sober seemlihed Gave utterance as he enter'd: "Ha!
I said, King of the butterflies; but by this gloom, And by old Rhadamanthus' tongue of doom, This dusk religion, pomp of solitude, And the Promethean clay by thief endued, By old Saturnus' forelock, by his head Shook with eternal palsy, I did wed Myself to things of light from infancy; And thus to be cast out, thus lorn to die, Is sure enough to make a mortal man Grow impious."
So he inwardly began On things for which no wording can be found; Deeper and deeper sinking, until drown'd Beyond the reach of music: for the choir Of Cynthia he heard not, though rough briar Nor muffling thicket interpos'd to dull The vesper hymn, far swollen, soft and full, Through the dark pillars of those sylvan aisles.
He saw not the two maidens, nor their smiles, Wan as primroses gather'd at midnight By chilly finger'd spring.
"Unhappy wight!
Endymion!"
said Peona, "we are here!
What wouldst thou ere we all are laid on bier?"
Then he embrac'd her, and his lady's hand Press'd, saying: "Sister, I would have command, If it were heaven's will, on our sad fate."
At which that dark-eyed stranger stood elate And said, in a new voice, but sweet as love, To Endymion's amaze: "By Cupid's dove, And so thou shalt!
and by the lilly truth Of my own breast thou shalt, beloved youth!"
And as she spake, into her face there came Light, as reflected from a silver flame: Her long black hair swell'd ampler, in display Full golden; in her eyes a brighter day Dawn'd blue and full of love.
Aye, he beheld Phoebe, his passion!
joyous she upheld Her lucid bow, continuing thus: "Drear, drear Has our delaying been; but foolish fear Withheld me first; and then decrees of fate; And then 'twas fit that from this mortal state Thou shouldst, my love, by some unlook'd for change Be spiritualiz'd.
Peona, we shall range These forests, and to thee they safe shall be As was thy cradle; hither shalt thou flee To meet us many a time."
Next Cynthia bright Peona kiss'd, and bless'd with fair good night: Her brother kiss'd her too, and knelt adown Before his goddess, in a blissful swoon.
She gave her fair hands to him, and behold, Before three swiftest kisses he had told, They vanish'd far away!- Peona went Home through the gloomy wood in wonderment.
THE EVE OF SAINT MARK Upon a Sabbath-day it fell; Twice holy was the Sabbath-bell That call'd the folk to evening prayer; The city streets were clean and fair From wholesome drench of April rains; And, on the western window panes, The chilly sunset faintly told Of unmatur'd green vallies cold, Of the green thorny bloomless hedge, Of rivers new with spring-tide sedge, Of primroses by shelter'd rills, And daisies on the aguish hills.
Twice holy was the Sabbath-bell: The silent streets were crowded well With staid and pious companies, Warm from their fire-side orat'ries, And moving with demurest air To even-song and vesper prayer.
Each arched porch and entry low Was fill'd with patient folk and slow, With whispers hush, and shuffling feet, While play'd the organ loud and sweet.
The bells had ceas'd, the prayers begun, And Bertha had not yet half done A curious volume, patch'd and torn, That all day long, from earliest morn, Had taken captive her two eyes Among its golden broideries; Perplex'd her with a thousand things,- The stars of Heaven, and angels' wings, Martyrs in a fiery blaze, Azure saints in silver rays, Moses' breastplate, and the seven Candlesticks John saw in Heaven, The winged Lion of Saint Mark, And the Covenantal Ark With its many mysteries, Cherubim and golden mice.
Bertha was a maiden fair, Dwelling in the old Minster-square; From her fire-side she could see Sidelong its rich antiquity, Far as the Bishop's garden-wall; Where sycamores and elm-trees tall, Full-leav'd, the forest had outstript, By no sharp north-wind ever nipt, So shelter'd by the mighty pile.
Bertha arose, and read awhile With forehead 'gainst the window-pane.
Again she try'd, and then again, Until the dusk eve left her dark Upon the legend of St.
Mark.
From plaited lawn-frill, fine and thin, She lifted up her soft warm chin, With aching neck and swimming eyes, And daz'd with saintly imageries.
All was gloom, and silent all, Save now and then the still foot-fall Of one returning homewards late Past the echoing minster-gate.
The clamorous daws, that all the day Above tree-tops and towers play, Pair by pair had gone to rest, Each in its ancient belfry-nest, Where asleep they fall betimes To music of the drowsy chimes.
All was silent, all was gloom Abroad and in the homely room: Down she sat, poor cheated soul!
And struck a lamp from the dismal coal; Lean'd forward with bright drooping hair And slant book full against the glare.
Her shadow, in uneasy guise, hover'd about, a giant size, On ceiling-beam and old oak chair, The parrot's cage, and panel square; And the warm angled winter screen, On which were many monsters seen, Call'd doves of Siam, Lima mice, And legless birds of Paradise, Macaw, and tender Avadavat, And silken-furr'd Angora cat.
Untir'd she read, her shadow still Glower'd about as it would fill The room with wildest forms and shades, As though some ghostly queen of spades Had come to mock behind her back, And dance, and ruffle her garments black.
Untir'd she read the legend page Of holy Mark, from youth to age, On land, on sea, in pagan chains, Rejoicing for his many pains.
Sometimes the learned Eremite With golden star, or dagger bright, Referr'd to pious poesies Written in smallest crow-quill size Beneath the text; and thus the rhyme Was parcell'd out from time to time: "Gif ye wol stonden hardie wight- Amiddes of the blacke night- Righte in the churche porch, pardie Ye wol behold a companie Approchen thee full dolourouse For sooth to sain from everich house Be it in City or village Wol come the Phantom and image Of ilka gent and ilka carle Whom colde Deathe hath in parle And wol some day that very year Touchen with foule venime spear And sadly do them all to die- Hem all shalt thou see verilie- And everichon shall by thee pass All who must die that year Alas -Als writith he of swevenis Men han beforne they wake in bliss, Whanne that hir friendes thinke hem bound In crimped shroude farre under grounde; And how a litling child mote be A saint er its nativitie, Gif that the modre (God her blesse!) +
Kepen in solitarinesse, And kissen devoute the holy croce.
Of Goddes love and Sathan's force He writith; and thinges many mo: Of swiche thinges I may not show, Bot I must tellen verilie Somdel of Sainte Cicilie, And chieflie what he auctorethe Of Sainte Markis life and dethe:" At length her constant eyelids come Upon the fervent martyrdom; Then lastly to his holy shrine, Exalt amid the tapers' shine At Venice,- FOR THERE'S BISHOP'S TEIGN I.
For there's Bishop's teign And King's teign And Coomb at the clear Teign head- Where close by the stream You may have your cream All spread upon barley bread.
II.
There's Arch Brook And there's Larch Brook Both turning many a mill, And cooling the drouth Of the salmon's mouth And fattening his silver gill.
III.
There is Wild Wood, A mild hood To the sheep on the lea o' the down, Where the golden furze, With its green, thin spurs, Doth catch at the maiden's gown.
IV.
There is Newton Marsh With its spear grass harsh- A pleasant summer level Where the maidens sweet Of the Market Street Do meet in the dusk to revel.
V.
There's the Barton rich With dyke and ditch And hedge for the thrush to live in, And the hollow tree For the buzzing bee And a bank for the wasp to hive in.
VI.
And O, and The daisies blow And the primroses are waken'd, And violets white Sit in silver plight, And the green bud's as long as the spike end.
VII.
Then who would go Into dark Soho And chatter with dack'd-hair'd critics, When he can stay For the new-mown hay And startle the dappled prickets?
HOW MANY BARDS GILD THE LAPSES OF TIME!
How many bards gild the lapses of time!
A few of them have ever been the food Of my delighted fancy,- I could brood Over their beauties, earthly, or sublime: And often, when I sit me down to rhyme, These will in throngs before my mind intrude: But no confusion, no disturbance rude Do they occasion; 'tis a pleasing chime.
So the unnumber'd sounds that evening store; The songs of birds- the whisp'ring of the leaves- The voice of waters- the great bell that heaves With solemn sound,- and thousand others more, That distance of recognizance bereaves, Make pleasing music, and not wild uproar.
HYPERION A FRAGMENT BOOK I.
Deep in the shady sadness of a vale Far sunken from the healthy breath of morn, Far from the fiery noon, and eve's one star, Sat gray-hair'd Saturn, quiet as a stone, Still as the silence round about his lair; Forest on forest hung about his head Like cloud on cloud.
No stir of air was there, Not so much life as on a summer's day Robs not one light seed from the feather'd grass, But where the dead leaf fell, there did it rest.
A stream went voiceless by, still deadened more By reason of his fallen divinity Spreading a shade: the Naiad 'mid her reeds Press'd her cold finger closer to her lips.
Along the margin-sand large foot-marks went, No further than to where his feet had stray'd, And slept there since.
Upon the sodden ground His old right hand lay nerveless, listless, dead, Unsceptred; and his realmless eyes were closed; While his bow'd head seem'd list'ning to the Earth, His ancient mother, for some comfort yet.
It seem'd no force could wake him from his place; But there came one, who with a kindred hand Touch'd his wide shoulders, after bending low With reverence, though to one who knew it not.
She was a Goddess of the infant world; By her in stature the tall Amazon Had stood a pigmy's height; she would have ta'en Achilles by the hair and bent his neck; Or with a finger stay'd Ixion's wheel.
Her face was large as that of Memphian sphinx, Pedestal'd haply in a palace court, When sages look'd to Egypt for their lore.
But oh!
how unlike marble was that face: How beautiful, if sorrow had not made Sorrow more beautiful than Beauty's self.
There was a listening fear in her regard, As if calamity had but begun; As if the vanward clouds of evil days Had spent their malice, and the sullen rear Was with its stored thunder labouring up.
One hand she press'd upon that aching spot Where beats the human heart, as if just there, Though an immortal, she felt cruel pain: The other upon Saturn's bended neck She laid, and to the level of his ear Leaning with parted lips, some words she spake In solemn tenour and deep organ tone: Some mourning words, which in our feeble tongue Would come in these like accents; O how frail To that large utterance of the early Gods!
"Saturn, look up!- though wherefore, poor old King?
"I have no comfort for thee, no not one: "I cannot say, 'O wherefore sleepest thou?'
"For heaven is parted from thee, and the earth "Knows thee not, thus afflicted, for a God; "And ocean too, with all its solemn noise, "Has from thy sceptre pass'd; and all the air "Is emptied of thine hoary majesty.
"Thy thunder, conscious of the new command, "Rumbles reluctant o'er our fallen house; "And thy sharp lightning in unpractis'd hands "Scorches and burns our once serene domain.
"O aching time!
O moments big as years!
"All as ye pass swell out the monstrous truth, "And press it so upon our weary griefs "That unbelief has not a space to breathe.
"Saturn, sleep on:- O thoughtless, why did I "Thus violate thy slumbrous solitude?
"Why should I ope thy melancholy eyes?
"Saturn, sleep on!
while at thy feet I weep."
As when, upon a tranced summer-night, Those green-rob'd senators of mighty woods, Tall oaks, branch-charmed by the earnest stars, Dream, and so dream all night without a stir, Save from one gradual solitary gust Which comes upon the silence, and dies off, As if the ebbing air had but one wave; So came these words and went; the while in tears She touch'd her fair large forehead to the ground, Just where her falling hair might be outspread A soft and silken mat for Saturn's feet.
One moon, with alteration slow, had shed Her silver seasons four upon the night, And still these two were postured motionless, Like natural sculpture in cathedral cavern; The frozen God still couchant on the earth, And the sad Goddess weeping at his feet: Until at length old Saturn lifted up His faded eyes, and saw his kingdom gone, And all the gloom and sorrow of the place, And that fair kneeling Goddess; and then spake, As with a palsied tongue, and while his beard Shook horrid with such aspen-malady: "O tender spouse of gold Hyperion, "Thea, I feel thee ere I see thy face; "Look up, and let me see our doom in it; "Look up, and tell me if this feeble shape "Is Saturn's; tell me, if thou hear'st the voice "Of Saturn; tell me, if this wrinkling brow, "Naked and bare of its great diadem, "Peers like the front of Saturn.
Who had power "To make me desolate?
whence came the strength?
"How was it nurtur'd to such bursting forth, "While Fate seem'd strangled in my nervous grasp?
"But it is so; and I am smother'd up, "And buried from all godlike exercise "Of influence benign on planets pale, "Of admonitions to the winds and seas, "Of peaceful sway above man's harvesting, "And all those acts which Deity supreme "Doth ease its heart of love in.- I am gone "Away from my own bosom: I have left "My strong identity, my real self, "Somewhere between the throne, and where I sit "Here on this spot of earth.
Search, Thea, search!
"Open thine eyes eterne, and sphere them round "Upon all space: space starr'd, and lorn of light; "Space region'd with life-air; and barren void; "Spaces of fire, and all the yawn of hell.- "Search, Thea, search!
and tell me, if thou seest "A certain shape or shadow, making way "With wings or chariot fierce to repossess "A heaven he lost erewhile: it must- it must "Be of ripe progress- Saturn must be King.
"Yes, there must be a golden victory; "There must be Gods thrown down, and trumpets blown "Of triumph calm, and hymns of festival "Upon the gold clouds metropolitan, "Voices of soft proclaim, and silver stir "Of strings in hollow shells; and there shall be "Beautiful things made new, for the surprise "Of the sky-children; I will give command: "Thea!
Thea!
Thea!
where is Saturn?"
This passion lifted him upon his feet, And made his hands to struggle in the air, His Druid locks to shake and ooze with sweat, His eyes to fever out, his voice to cease.
He stood, and heard not Thea's sobbing deep; A little time, and then again he snatch'd Utterance thus.- "But cannot I create?
"Cannot I form?
Cannot I fashion forth "Another world, another universe, "To overbear and crumble this to naught?
"Where is another chaos?
Where?"- That word Found way unto Olympus, and made quake The rebel three.- Thea was startled up, And in her bearing was a sort of hope, As thus she quick-voic'd spake, yet full of awe.
"This cheers our fallen house: come to our friends, "O Saturn!
come away, and give them heart; "I know the covert, for thence came I hither."
Thus brief; then with beseeching eyes she went With backward footing through the shade a space: He follow'd, and she turn'd to lead the way Through aged boughs, that yielded like the mist Which eagles cleave upmounting from their nest.
Meanwhile in other realms big tears were shed, More sorrow like to this, and such like woe, Too huge for mortal tongue or pen of scribe: The Titans fierce, self-hid, or prison-bound, Groan'd for the old allegiance once more, And listen'd in sharp pain for Saturn's voice.
But one of the whole mammoth-brood still kept His sov'reignty, and rule, and majesty;- Blazing Hyperion on his orbed fire Still sat, still snuff'd the incense, teeming up From man to the sun's God; yet unsecure: For as among us mortals omens drear Fright and perplex, so also shuddered he- Not at dog's howl, or gloom-bird's hated screech, Or the familiar visiting of one Upon the first toll of his passing-bell, Or prophesyings of the midnight lamp; But horrors, portion'd to a giant nerve, Oft made Hyperion ache.
His palace bright Bastion'd with pyramids of glowing gold, And touch'd with shade of bronzed obelisks, Glar'd a blood-red through all its thousand courts, Arches, and domes, and fiery galleries; And all its curtains of Aurorian clouds Flush'd angerly: while sometimes eagle's wings, Unseen before by Gods or wondering men, Darken'd the place; and neighing steeds were heard, Not heard before by Gods or wondering men.
Also, when he would taste the spicy wreaths Of incense, breath'd aloft from sacred hills, Instead of sweets, his ample palate took Savour of poisonous brass and metal sick: And so, when harbour'd in the sleepy west, After the full completion of fair day,- For rest divine upon exalted couch And slumber in the arms of melody, He pac'd away the pleasant hours of ease With stride colossal, on from hall to hall; While far within each aisle and deep recess, His winged minions in close clusters stood, Amaz'd and full of fear; like anxious men Who on wide plains gather in panting troops, When earthquakes jar their battlements and towers.
Even now, while Saturn, rous'd from icy trance, Went step for step with Thea through the woods, Hyperion, leaving twilight in the rear, Came slope upon the threshold of the west; Then, as was wont, his palace-door flew ope In smoothest silence, save what solemn tubes, Blown by the serious Zephyrs, gave of sweet And wandering sounds, slow-breathed melodies; And like a rose in vermeil tint and shape, In fragrance soft, and coolness to the eye, That inlet to severe magnificence Stood full blown, for the God to enter in.
He enter'd, but he enter'd full of wrath; His flaming robes stream'd out beyond his heels, And gave a roar, as if of earthly fire, That scar'd away the meek ethereal Hours And made their dove-wings tremble.
On he flared, From stately nave to nave, from vault to vault, Through bowers of fragrant and enwreathed light, And diamond-paved lustrous long arcades, Until he reach'd the great main cupola; There standing fierce beneath, he stamped his foot, And from the basement deep to the high towers Jarr'd his own golden region; and before The quavering thunder thereupon had ceas'd, His voice leapt out, despite of godlike curb, To this result: "O dreams of day and night!
"O monstrous forms!
O effigies of pain!
"O spectres busy in a cold, cold gloom!
"O lank-ear'd Phantoms of black-weeded pools!
"Why do I know ye?
why have I seen ye?
why "Is my eternal essence thus distraught "To see and to behold these horrors new?
"Saturn is fallen, am I too to fall?
"Am I to leave this haven of my rest, "This cradle of my glory, this soft clime, "This calm luxuriance of blissful light, "These crystalline pavilions, and pure fanes, "Of all my lucent empire?
It is left "Deserted, void, nor any haunt of mine.
"The blaze, the splendour, and the symmetry, "I cannot see- but darkness, death and darkness.
"Even here, into my centre of repose, "The shady visions come to domineer, "Insult, and blind, and stifle up my pomp.- "Fall!- No, by Tellus and her briny robes!
"Over the fiery frontier of my realms "I will advance a terrible right arm "Shall scare that infant thunderer, rebel Jove, "And bid old Saturn take his throne again."- He spake, and ceas'd, the while a heavier threat Held struggle with his throat but came not forth; For as in theatres of crowded men Hubbub increases more they call out "Hush!"
So at Hyperion's words the Phantoms pale Bestirr'd themselves, thrice horrible and cold; And from the mirror'd level where he stood A mist arose, as from a scummy marsh.
At this, through all his bulk an agony Crept gradual, from the feet unto the crown, Like a lithe serpent vast and muscular Making slow way, with head and neck convuls'd From over-strained might.
Releas'd, he fled To the eastern gates, and full six dewy hours Before the dawn in season due should blush, He breath'd fierce breath against the sleepy portals, Clear'd them of heavy vapours, burst them wide Suddenly on the ocean's chilly streams.
The planet orb of fire, whereon he rode Each day from east to west the heavens through, Spun round in sable curtaining of clouds; Not therefore veiled quite, blindfold, and hid, But ever and anon the glancing spheres, Circles, and arcs, and broad-belting colure, Glow'd through, and wrought upon the muffling dark Sweet-shaped lightnings from the nadir deep Up to the zenith,- hieroglyphics old Which sages and keen-eyed astrologers Then living on the earth, with labouring thought Won from the gaze of many centuries: Now lost, save what we find on remnants huge Of stone, or marble swart; their import gone, Their wisdom long since fled.- Two wings this orb Possess'd for glory, two fair argent wings, Ever exalted at the God's approach: And now, from forth the gloom their plumes immense Rose, one by one, till all outspreaded were; While still the dazzling globe maintain'd eclipse, Awaiting for Hyperion's command.
Fain would he have commanded, fain took throne And bid the day begin, if but for change.
He might not:- No, though a primeval God: The sacred seasons might not be disturb'd.
Therefore the operations of the dawn Stay'd in their birth, even as here 'tis told.
Those silver wings expanded sisterly, Eager to sail their orb; the porches wide Open'd upon the dusk demesnes of night; And the bright Titan, phrenzied with new woes, Unus'd to bend, by hard compulsion bent His spirit to the sorrow of the time; And all along a dismal rack of clouds, Upon the boundaries of day and night, He stretch'd himself in grief and radiance faint.
There as he lay, the Heaven with its stars Look'd down on him with pity, and the voice Of Coelus, from the universal space, Thus whisper'd low and solemn in his ear.
"O brightest of my children dear, earth-born "And sky-engendered, Son of Mysteries "All unrevealed even to the powers "Which met at thy creating; at whose joys "And palpitations sweet, and pleasures soft, "I, Coelus, wonder, how they came and whence; "And at the fruits thereof what shapes they be, "Distinct, and visible; symbols divine, "Manifestations of that beauteous life "Diffus'd unseen throughout eternal space: "Of these new-form'd art thou, oh brightest child!
"Of these, thy brethren and the Goddesses!
"There is sad feud among ye, and rebellion "Of son against his sire.
I saw him fall, "I saw my first-born tumbled from his throne!
"To me his arms were spread, to me his voice "Found way from forth the thunders round his head!
"Pale wox I, and in vapours hid my face.
"Art thou, too, near such doom?
vague fear there is: "For I have seen my sons most unlike Gods.
"Divine ye were created, and divine "In sad demeanour, solemn, undisturb'd, "Unruffled, like high Gods, ye liv'd and ruled: "Now I behold in you fear, hope, and wrath; "Actions of rage and passion; even as "I see them, on the mortal world beneath, "In men who die.- This is the grief, O Son!
"Sad sign of ruin, sudden dismay, and fall!
"Yet do thou strive; as thou art capable, "As thou canst move about, an evident God; "And canst oppose to each malignant hour "Ethereal presence:- I am but a voice; "My life is but the life of winds and tides, "No more than winds and tides can I avail:- "But thou canst.- Be thou therefore in the van "Of circumstance; yea, seize the arrow's barb "Before the tense string murmur.- To the earth!
"For there thou wilt find Saturn, and his woes.
"Meantime I will keep watch on thy bright sun, "And of thy seasons be a careful nurse."- Ere half this region-whisper had come down, Hyperion arose, and on the stars Lifted his curved lids, and kept them wide Until it ceas'd; and still he kept them wide: And still they were the same bright, patient stars.
Then with a slow incline of his broad breast, Like to a diver in the pearly seas, Forward he stoop'd over the airy shore, And plung'd all noiseless into the deep night.
BOOK II.
Just at the self-same beat of Time's wide wings Hyperion slid into the rustled air, And Saturn gain'd with Thea that sad place Where Cybele and the bruised Titans mourn'd.
It was a den where no insulting light Could glimmer on their tears; where their own groans They felt, but heard not, for the solid roar Of thunderous waterfalls and torrents hoarse, Pouring a constant bulk, uncertain where.
Crag jutting forth to crag, and rocks that seem'd Ever as if just rising from a sleep, Forehead to forehead held their monstrous horns; And thus in thousand hugest phantasies Made a fit roofing to this nest of woe.
Instead of thrones, hard flint they sat upon, Couches of rugged stone, and slaty ridge Stubborn'd with iron.
All were not assembled: Some chain'd in torture, and some wandering.
Coeus, and Gyges, and Briareus, Typhon, and Dolor, and Porphyrion, With many more, the brawniest in assault, Were pent in regions of laborious breath; Dungeon'd in opaque element, to keep Their clenched teeth still clench'd, and all their limbs Lock'd up like veins of metal, crampt and screw'd; Without a motion, save of their big hearts Heaving in pain, and horribly convuls'd With sanguine feverous boiling gurge of pulse.
Mnemosyne was straying in the world; Far from her moon had Phoebe wandered; And many else were free to roam abroad, But for the main, here found they covert drear.
Scarce images of life, one here, one there, Lay vast and edgeways; like a dismal cirque Of Druid stones, upon a forlorn moor, When the chill rain begins at shut of eve, In dull November, and their chancel vault, The Heaven itself, is blinded throughout night.
Each one kept shroud, nor to his neighbour gave Or word, or look, or action of despair.
Creus was one; his ponderous iron mace Lay by him, and a shatter'd rib of rock Told of his rage, ere he thus sank and pined.
Iapetus another; in his grasp, A serpent's plashy neck; its barbed tongue Squeez'd from the gorge, and all its uncurl'd length Dead; and because the creature could not spit Its poison in the eyes of conquering Jove.
Next Cottus: prone he lay, chin uppermost, As though in pain; for still upon the flint He ground severe his skull, with open mouth And eyes at horrid working.
Nearest him Asia, born of most enormous Caf, Who cost her mother Tellus keener pangs, Though feminine, than any of her sons: More thought than woe was in her dusky face, For she was prophesying of her glory; And in her wide imagination stood Palm-shaded temples, and high rival fanes, By Oxus or in Ganges' sacred isles.
Even as Hope upon her anchor leans, So leant she, not so fair, upon a tusk Shed from the broadest of her elephants.
Above her, on a crag's uneasy shelve, Upon his elbow rais'd, all prostrate else, Shadow'd Enceladus; once tame and mild As grazing ox unworried in the meads; Now tiger-passion'd, lion-thoughted, wroth, He meditated, plotted, and even now Was hurling mountains in that second war, Not long delay'd, that scar'd the younger Gods To hide themselves in forms of beast and bird.
Not far hence Atlas; and beside him prone Phorcus, the sire of Gorgons.
Neighbour'd close Oceanus, and Tethys, in whose lap Sobb'd Clymene among her tangled hair.
In midst of all lay Themis, at the feet Of Ops the queen all clouded round from sight; No shape distinguishable, more than when Thick night confounds the pine-tops with the clouds: And many else whose names may not be told.
For when the Muse's wings are air-ward spread, Who shall delay her flight?
And she must chaunt Of Saturn, and his guide, who now had climb'd With damp and slippery footing from a depth More horrid still.
Above a sombre cliff Their heads appear'd, and up their stature grew Till on the level height their steps found ease: Then Thea spread abroad her trembling arms Upon the precincts of this nest of pain, And sidelong fix'd her eye on Saturn's face: There saw she direst strife; the supreme God At war with all the frailty of grief, Of rage, of fear, anxiety, revenge, Remorse, spleen, hope, but most of all despair.
Against these plagues he strove in vain; for Fate Had pour'd a mortal oil upon his head, A disanointing poison: so that Thea, Affrighted, kept her still, and let him pass First onwards in, among the fallen tribe.
As with us mortal men, the laden heart Is persecuted more, and fever'd more, When it is nighing to the mournful house Where other hearts are sick of the same bruise; So Saturn, as he walk'd into the midst, Felt faint, and would have sunk among the rest, But that he met Enceladus's eye, Whose mightiness, and awe of him, at once Came like an inspiration; and he shouted, "Titans, behold your God!"
at which some groan'd; Some started on their feet; some also shouted; Some wept, some wail'd, all bow'd with reverence; And Ops, uplifting her black folded veil, Show'd her pale cheeks, and all her forehead wan, Her eye-brows thin and jet, and hollow eyes.
There is a roaring in the bleak-grown pines When Winter lifts his voice; there is a noise Among immortals when a God gives sign, With hushing finger, how he means to load His tongue with the full weight of utterless thought, With thunder, and with music, and with pomp: Such noise is like the roar of bleak-grown pines: Which, when it ceases in this mountain'd world, No other sound succeeds; but ceasing here, Among these fallen, Saturn's voice therefrom Grew up like organ, that begins anew Its strain, when other harmonies, stopt short, Leave the dinn'd air vibrating silverly.
Thus grew it up- "Not in my own sad breast, "Which is its own great judge and searcher out, "Can I find reason why ye should be thus: "Not in the legends of the first of days, "Studied from that old spirit-leaved book "Which starry Uranus with finger bright "Sav'd from the shores of darkness, when the waves "Low-ebb'd still hid it up in shallow gloom;- "And the which book ye know I ever kept "For my firm-based footstool:- Ah, infirm!
"Not there, nor in sign, symbol, or portent "Of element, earth, water, air, and fire,- "At war, at peace, or inter-quarreling "One against one, or two, or three, or all "Each several one against the other three, "As fire with air loud warring when rain-floods "Drown both, and press them both against earth's face, "Where, finding sulphur, a quadruple wrath "Unhinges the poor world;- not in that strife, "Wherefrom I take strange lore, and read it deep, "Can I find reason why ye should be thus: "No, no- where can unriddle, though I search, "And pore on Nature's universal scroll "Even to swooning, why ye, Divinities, "The first-born of all shap'd and palpable Gods, "Should cower beneath what, in comparison, "Is untremendous might.
Yet ye are here, "O'erwhelm'd, and spurn'd, and batter'd, ye are here!
"O Titans, shall I say, 'Arise!'- Ye groan: "Shall I say 'Crouch!'- Ye groan.
What can I then?
"O Heaven wide!
O unseen parent dear!
"What can I?
Tell me, all ye brethren Gods, "How we can war, how engine our great wrath!
"O speak your counsel now, for Saturn's ear "Is all a-hunger'd.
Thou, Oceanus, "Ponderest high and deep; and in thy face "I see, astonied, that severe content "Which comes of thought and musing: give us help!"
So ended Saturn; and the God of the Sea, Sophist and sage, from no Athenian grove, But cogitation in his watery shades, Arose, with locks not oozy, and began, In murmurs, which his first-endeavouring tongue Caught infant-like from the far-foamed sands.
"O ye, whom wrath consumes!
who, passion-stung, "Writhe at defeat, and nurse your agonies!
"Shut up your senses, stifle up your ears, "My voice is not a bellows unto ire.
"Yet listen, ye who will, whilst I bring proof "How ye, perforce, must be content to stoop: "And in the proof much comfort will I give, "If ye will take that comfort in its truth.
"We fall by course of Nature's law, not force "Of thunder, or of Jove.
Great Saturn, thou "Hast sifted well the atom-universe; "But for this reason, that thou art the King, "And only blind from sheer supremacy, "One avenue was shaded from thine eyes, "Through which I wandered to eternal truth.
"And first, as thou wast not the first of powers, "So art thou not the last; it cannot be: "Thou art not the beginning nor the end.
"From chaos and parental darkness came "Light, the first fruits of that intestine broil, "That sullen ferment, which for wondrous ends "Was ripening in itself.
The ripe hour came, "And with it light, and light, engendering "Upon its own producer, forthwith touch'd "The whole enormous matter into life.
"Upon that very hour, our parentage, "The Heavens, and the Earth, were manifest: "Then thou first born, and we the giant race, "Found ourselves ruling new and beauteous realms.
"Now comes the pain of truth, to whom 'tis pain; "O folly!
for to bear all naked truths, "And to envisage circumstance, all calm, "That is the top of sovereignty.
Mark well!
"As Heaven and Earth are fairer, fairer far "Than Chaos and blank Darkness, though once chiefs; "And as we show beyond that Heaven and Earth "In form and shape compact and beautiful, "In will, in action free, companionship, "And thousand other signs of purer life; "So on our heels a fresh perfection treads, "A power more strong in beauty, born of us "And fated to excel us, as we pass "In glory that old Darkness: nor are we "Thereby more conquer'd, than by us the rule "Of shapeless Chaos.
Say, doth the dull soil "Quarrel with the proud forests it hath fed, "And feedeth still, more comely than itself?
"Can it deny the chiefdom of green groves?
"Or shall the tree be envious of the dove "Because it cooeth, and hath snowy wings "To wander wherewithal and find its joys?
"We are such forest-trees, and our fair boughs "Have bred forth, not pale solitary doves, "But eagles golden-feather'd, who do tower "Above us in their beauty, and must reign "In right thereof; for 'tis the eternal law "That first in beauty should be first in might: "Yea, by that law, another race may drive "Our conquerors to mourn as we do now.
"Have ye beheld the young God of the Seas, "My dispossessor?
Have ye seen his face?
"Have ye beheld his chariot, foam'd along "By noble winged creatures he hath made?
"I saw him on the calmed waters scud, "With such a glow of beauty in his eyes, "That it enforc'd me to bid sad farewell "To all my empire: farewell sad I took, "And hither came, to see how dolorous fate "Had wrought upon ye; and how I might best "Give consolation in this woe extreme.
"Receive the truth, and let it be your balm."
Whether through poz'd conviction, or disdain, They guarded silence, when Oceanus Left murmuring, what deepest thought can tell?
But so it was, none answer'd for a space, Save one whom none regarded, Clymene; And yet she answer'd not, only complain'd, With hectic lips, and eyes up-looking mild, Thus wording timidly among the fierce: "O Father, I am here the simplest voice, "And all my knowledge is that joy is gone, "And this thing woe crept in among our hearts, "There to remain for ever, as I fear: "I would not bode of evil, if I thought "So weak a creature could turn off the help "Which by just right should come of mighty Gods; "Yet let me tell my sorrow, let me tell "Of what I heard, and how it made me weep, "And know that we had parted from all hope.
"I stood upon a shore, a pleasant shore, "Where a sweet clime was breathed from a land "Of fragrance, quietness, and trees, and flowers.
"Full of calm joy it was, as I of grief; "Too full of joy and soft delicious warmth; "So that I felt a movement in my heart "To chide, and to reproach that solitude "With songs of misery, music of our woes; "And sat me down, and took a mouthed shell "And murmur'd into it, and made melody- "O melody no more!
for while I sang, "And with poor skill let pass into the breeze "The dull shell's echo, from a bowery strand "Just opposite, an island of the sea, "There came enchantment with the shifting wind, "That did both drown and keep alive my ears.
"I threw my shell away upon the sand, "And a wave fill'd it, as my sense was fill'd "With that new blissful golden melody.
"A living death was in each gush of sounds, "Each family of rapturous hurried notes, "That fell, one after one, yet all at once, "Like pearl beads dropping sudden from their string: "And then another, then another strain, "Each like a dove leaving its olive perch, "With music wing'd instead of silent plumes, "To hover round my head, and make me sick "Of joy and grief at once.
Grief overcame, "And I was stopping up my frantic ears, "When, past all hindrance of my trembling hands, "A voice came sweeter, sweeter than all tune, "And still it cried, 'Apollo!
young Apollo!'
"'The morning-bright Apollo!
young Apollo!'
"I fled, it follow'd me, and cried 'Apollo!'
"O Father, and O Brethren, had ye felt "Those pains of mine; O Saturn, hadst thou felt, "Ye would not call this too indulged tongue "Presumptuous, in thus venturing to be heard."
So far her voice flow'd on, like timorous brook That, lingering along a pebbled coast, Doth fear to meet the sea: but sea it met, And shudder'd; for the overwhelming voice Of huge Enceladus swallow'd it in wrath: The ponderous syllables, like sullen waves In the half-glutted hollows of reef-rocks, Came booming thus, while still upon his arm He lean'd; not rising, from supreme contempt.
"Or shall we listen to the over-wise, "Or to the over-foolish, Giant-Gods?
"Not thunderbolt on thunderbolt, till all "That rebel Jove's whole armoury were spent, "Not world on world upon these shoulders piled, "Could agonize me more than baby-words "In midst of this dethronement horrible.
"Speak!
roar!
shout!
yell!
ye sleepy Titans all.
"Do ye forget the blows, the buffets vile?
"Are ye not smitten by a youngling arm?
"Dost thou forget, sham Monarch of the Waves, "Thy scalding in the seas?
What, have I rous'd "Your spleens with so few simple words as these?
"O joy!
for now I see ye are not lost: "O joy!
for now I see a thousand eyes "Wide-glaring for revenge!"- As this he said, He lifted up his stature vast, and stood, Still without intermission speaking thus: "Now ye are flames, I'll tell you how to burn, "And purge the ether of our enemies; "How to feed fierce the crooked stings of fire, "And singe away the swollen clouds of Jove, "Stifling that puny essence in its tent.
"O let him feel the evil he hath done; "For though I scorn Oceanus's lore, "Much pain have I for more than loss of realms: "The days of peace and slumberous calm are fled; "Those days, all innocent of scathing war, "When all the fair Existences of heaven "Came open-eyed to guess what we would speak:- "That was before our brows were taught to frown, "Before our lips knew else but solemn sounds; "That was before we knew the winged thing, "Victory, might be lost, or might be won.
"And be ye mindful that Hyperion, "Our brightest brother, still is undisgraced- "Hyperion, lo!
his radiance is here!"
All eyes were on Enceladus's face, And they beheld, while still Hyperion's name Flew from his lips up to the vaulted rocks, A pallid gleam across his features stern: Not savage, for he saw full many a God Wroth as himself.
He look'd upon them all, And in each face he saw a gleam of light, But splendider in Saturn's, whose hoar locks Shone like the bubbling foam about a keel When the prow sweeps into a midnight cove.
In pale and silver silence they remain'd, Till suddenly a splendour, like the morn, Pervaded all the beetling gloomy steeps, All the sad spaces of oblivion, And every gulf, and every chasm old, And every height, and every sullen depth, Voiceless, or hoarse with loud tormented streams: And all the everlasting cataracts, And all the headlong torrents far and near, Mantled before in darkness and huge shade, Now saw the light and made it terrible.
It was Hyperion:- a granite peak His bright feet touch'd, and there he stay'd to view The misery his brilliance had betray'd To the most hateful seeing of itself.
Golden his hair of short Numidian curl, Regal his shape majestic, a vast shade In midst of his own brightness, like the bulk Of Memnon's image at the set of sun To one who travels from the dusking East: Sighs, too, as mournful as that Memnon's harp He utter'd, while his hands contemplative He press'd together, and in silence stood.
Despondence seiz'd again the fallen Gods At sight of the dejected King of Day, And many hid their faces from the light: But fierce Enceladus sent forth his eyes Among the brotherhood; and, at their glare, Uprose Iapetus, and Creus too, And Phorcus, sea-born, and together strode To where he towered on his eminence.
There those four shouted forth old Saturn's name; Hyperion from the peak loud answered, "Saturn!"
Saturn sat near the Mother of the Gods, In whose face was no joy, though all the Gods Gave from their hollow throats the name of "Saturn!"
BOOK III.
Thus in alternate uproar and sad peace, Amazed were those Titans utterly.
O leave them, Muse!
O leave them to their woes; For thou art weak to sing such tumults dire: A solitary sorrow best befits Thy lips, and antheming a lonely grief.
Leave them, O Muse!
for thou anon wilt find Many a fallen old Divinity Wandering in vain about bewildered shores.
Meantime touch piously the Delphic harp, And not a wind of heaven but will breathe In aid soft warble from the Dorian flute; For lo!
'tis for the Father of all verse.
Flush every thing that hath a vermeil hue, Let the rose glow intense and warm the air, And let the clouds of even and of morn Float in voluptuous fleeces o'er the hills; Let the red wine within the goblet boil, Cold as a bubbling well; let faint-lipp'd shells, On sands, or in great deeps, vermilion turn Through all their labyrinths; and let the maid Blush keenly, as with some warm kiss surpris'd.
Chief isle of the embowered Cyclades, Rejoice, O Delos, with thine olives green, And poplars, and lawn-shading palms, and beech, In which the Zephyr breathes the loudest song, And hazels thick, dark-stemm'd beneath the shade: Apollo is once more the golden theme!
Where was he, when the Giant of the Sun Stood bright, amid the sorrow of his peers?
Together had he left his mother fair And his twin-sister sleeping in their bower, And in the morning twilight wandered forth Beside the osiers of a rivulet, Full ankle-deep in lillies of the vale.
The nightingale had ceas'd, and a few stars Were lingering in the heavens, while the thrush Began calm-throated.
Throughout all the isle There was no covert, no retired cave Unhaunted by the murmurous noise of waves, Though scarcely heard in many a green recess.
He listen'd, and he wept, and his bright tears Went trickling down the golden bow he held.
Thus with half-shut suffused eyes he stood, While from beneath some cumbrous boughs hard by With solemn step an awful Goddess came, And there was purport in her looks for him, Which he with eager guess began to read Perplex'd, the while melodiously he said: "How cam'st thou over the unfooted sea?
"Or hath that antique mien and robed form "Mov'd in these vales invisible till now?
"Sure I have heard those vestments sweeping o'er "The fallen leaves, when I have sat alone "In cool mid-forest.
Surely I have traced "The rustle of those ample skirts about "These grassy solitudes, and seen the flowers "Lift up their heads, as still the whisper pass'd.
"Goddess!
I have beheld those eyes before, "And their eternal calm, and all that face, "Or I have dream'd."- "Yes," said the supreme shape, "Thou hast dream'd of me; and awaking up "Didst find a lyre all golden by thy side, "Whose strings touch'd by thy fingers, all the vast "Unwearied ear of the whole universe "Listen'd in pain and pleasure at the birth "Of such new tuneful wonder.
Is't not strange "That thou shouldst weep, so gifted?
Tell me, youth, "What sorrow thou canst feel; for I am sad "When thou dost shed a tear: explain thy griefs "To one who in this lonely isle hath been "The watcher of thy sleep and hours of life, "From the young day when first thy infant hand "Pluck'd witless the weak flowers, till thine arm "Could bend that bow heroic to all times.
"Show thy heart's secret to an ancient Power "Who hath forsaken old and sacred thrones "For prophecies of thee, and for the sake "Of loveliness new born."- Apollo then, With sudden scrutiny and gloomless eyes, Thus answer'd, while his white melodious throat Throbb'd with the syllables.- "Mnemosyne!
"Thy name is on my tongue, I know not how; "Why should I tell thee what thou so well seest?
"Why should I strive to show what from thy lips "Would come no mystery?
For me, dark, dark, "And painful vile oblivion seals my eyes: "I strive to search wherefore I am so sad, "Until a melancholy numbs my limbs; "And then upon the grass I sit, and moan, "Like one who once had wings.- O why should I "Feel curs'd and thwarted, when the liegeless air "Yields to my step aspirant?
why should I "Spurn the green turf as hateful to my feet?
"Goddess benign, point forth some unknown thing: "Are there not other regions than this isle?
"What are the stars?
There is the sun, the sun!
"And the most patient brilliance of the moon!
"And stars by thousands!
Point me out the way "To any one particular beauteous star, "And I will flit into it with my lyre "And make its silvery splendour pant with bliss.
"I have heard the cloudy thunder: Where is power?
"Whose hand, whose essence, what divinity "Makes this alarum in the elements, "While I here idle listen on the shores "In fearless yet in aching ignorance?
"O tell me, lonely Goddess, by thy harp, "That waileth every morn and eventide, "Tell me why thus I rave, about these groves!
"Mute thou remainest- mute!
yet I can read "A wondrous lesson in thy silent face: "Knowledge enormous makes a God of me.
"Names, deeds, grey legends, dire events, rebellions, "Majesties, sovran voices, agonies, "Creations and destroyings, all at once "Pour into the wide hollows of my brain, "And deify me, as if some blithe wine "Or bright elixir peerless I had drunk, "And so become immortal."- Thus the God, While his enkindled eyes, with level glance Beneath his white soft temples, stedfast kept Trembling with light upon Mnemosyne.
Soon wild commotions shook him, and made flush All the immortal fairness of his limbs Into a hue more roseate than sweet pain Gives to a ravish'd Nymph when her warm tears Gush luscious with no sob.
Or more severe,- More like the struggle at the gate of death; Or liker still to one who should take leave Of pale immortal death, and with a pang As hot as death's is chill, with fierce convulse Die into life: so young Apollo anguish'd: His very hair, his golden tresses famed Kept undulation round his eager neck.
During the pain Mnemosyne upheld Her arms as one who prophesied.- At length Apollo shriek'd;- and lo!
from all his limbs Celestial Glory dawn'd: he was a god!
I STOOD TIP-TOE UPON A LITTLE HILL Places of nestling green for Poets made.
STORY OF RIMINI.
I stood tip-toe upon a little hill, The air was cooling, and so very still, That the sweet buds which with a modest pride Pull droopingly, in slanting curve aside, Their scantly leav'd, and finely tapering stems, Had not yet lost those starry diadems Caught from the early sobbing of the morn.
The clouds were pure and white as flocks new shorn, And fresh from the clear brook; sweetly they slept On the blue fields of heaven, and then there crept A little noiseless noise among the leaves, Born of the very sigh that silence heaves: For not the faintest motion could be seen Of all the shades that slanted o'er the green.
There was wide wand'ring for the greediest eye, To peer about upon variety; Far round the horizon's crystal air to skim, And trace the dwindled edgings of its brim; To picture out the quaint, and curious bending Of a fresh woodland alley, never ending; Or by the bowery clefts, and leafy shelves, Guess where the jaunty streams refresh themselves.
I gazed awhile, and felt as light, and free As though the fanning wings of Mercury Had play'd upon my heels: I was light-hearted, And many pleasures to my vision started; So I straightway began to pluck a posey Of luxuries bright, milky, soft and rosy.
A bush of May flowers with the bees about them; Ah, sure no tasteful nook would be without them; And let a lush laburnum oversweep them, And let long grass grow round the roots to keep them Moist, cool and green; and shade the violets, That they may bind the moss in leafy nets.
A filbert hedge with wild briar overtwined, And clumps of woodbine taking the soft wind Upon their summer thrones; there too should be The frequent chequer of a youngling tree, That with a score of light green brethren shoots From the quaint mossiness of aged roots: Round which is heard a spring-head of clear waters Babbling so wildly of its lovely daughters The spreading blue-bells: it may haply mourn That such fair clusters should be rudely torn From their fresh beds, and scattered thoughtlessly By infant hands, left on the path to die.
Open afresh your round of starry folds, Ye ardent marigolds!
Dry up the moisture from your golden lids, For great Apollo bids That in these days your praises should be sung On many harps, which he has lately strung; And when again your dewiness he kisses, Tell him, I have you in my world of blisses: So haply when I rove in some far vale, His mighty voice may come upon the gale.
Here are sweet peas, on tip-toe for a flight: With wings of gentle flush o'er delicate white, And taper fingers catching at all things, To bind them all about with tiny rings.
Linger awhile upon some bending planks That lean against a streamlet's rushy banks, And watch intently Nature's gentle doings: They will be found softer than ring-dove's cooings.
How silent comes the water round that bend; Not the minutest whisper does it send To the o'erhanging sallows: blades of grass Slowly across the chequer'd shadows pass.
Why, you might read two sonnets, ere they reach To where the hurrying freshnesses aye preach A natural sermon o'er their pebbly beds; Where swarms of minnows show their little heads, Staying their wavy bodies 'gainst the streams, To taste the luxury of sunny beams Temper'd with coolness.
How they ever wrestle With their own sweet delight, and ever nestle Their silver bellies on the pebbly sand.
If you but scantily hold out the hand, That very instant not one will remain; But turn your eye, and they are there again.
The ripples seem right glad to reach those cresses, And cool themselves among the em'rald tresses; The while they cool themselves, they freshness give, And moisture, that the bowery green may live: So keeping up an interchange of favours, Like good men in the truth of their behaviours.
Sometimes goldfinches one by one will drop From low hung branches; little space they stop; But sip, and twitter, and their feathers sleek; Then off at once, as in a wanton freak: Or perhaps, to show their black, and golden wings, Pausing upon their yellow flutterings.
Were I in such a place, I sure should pray That naught less sweet, might call my thoughts away, Than the soft rustle of a maiden's gown Fanning away the dandelion's down; Than the light music of her nimble toes Patting against the sorrel as she goes.
How she would start, and blush, thus to be caught Playing in all her innocence of thought.
O let me lead her gently o'er the brook, Watch her half-smiling lips, and downward look; O let me for one moment touch her wrist; Let me one moment to her breathing list; And as she leaves me may she often turn Her fair eyes looking through her locks auburne.
What next?
A tuft of evening primroses, O'er which the mind may hover till it dozes; O'er which it well might take a pleasant sleep, But that 'tis ever startled by the leap Of buds into ripe flowers; or by the flitting Of diverse moths, that aye their rest are quitting; Or by the moon lifting her silver rim Above a cloud, and with a gradual swim Coming into the blue with all her light.
O Maker of sweet poets, dear delight Of this fair world, and all its gentle livers; Spangler of clouds, halo of crystal rivers, Mingler with leaves, and dew and tumbling streams, Closer of lovely eyes to lovely dreams, Lover of loneliness, and wandering, Of upcast eye, and tender pondering!
Thee must I praise above all other glories That smile us on to tell delightful stories.
For what has made the sage or poet write But the fair paradise of Nature's light?
In the calm grandeur of a sober line, We see the waving of the mountain pine; And when a tale is beautifully staid, We feel the safety of a hawthorn glade: When it is moving on luxurious wings, The soul is lost in pleasant smotherings: Fair dewy roses brush against our faces, And flowering laurels spring from diamond vases; O'er head we see the jasmine and sweet briar, And bloomy grapes laughing from green attire; While at our feet, the voice of crystal bubbles Charms us at once away from all our troubles: So that we feel uplifted from the world, Walking upon the white clouds wreath'd and curl'd.
So felt he, who first told, how Psyche went On the smooth wind to realms of wonderment; What Psyche felt, and Love, when their full lips First touch'd; what amorous, and fondling nips They gave each other's cheeks; with all their sighs, And how they kist each other's tremulous eyes: The silver lamp,- the ravishment,- the wonder- The darkness,- loneliness,- the fearful thunder; Their woes gone by, and both to heaven upflown, To bow for gratitude before Jove's throne.
So did he feel, who pull'd the boughs aside, That we might look into a forest wide, To catch a glimpse of Fauns, and Dryades Coming with softest rustle through the trees; And garlands woven of flowers wild, and sweet, Upheld on ivory wrists, or sporting feet: Telling us how fair, trembling Syrinx fled Arcadian Pan, with such a fearful dread.
Poor nymph,- poor Pan,- how he did weep to find, Nought but a lovely sighing of the wind Along the reedy stream; a half-heard strain, Full of sweet desolation- balmy pain.
What first inspired a bard of old to sing Narcissus pining o'er the untainted spring?
In some delicious ramble, he had found A little space, with boughs all woven round; And in the midst of all, a clearer pool Than e'er reflected in its pleasant cool, The blue sky here, and there, serenely peeping Through tendril wreaths fantastically creeping.
And on the bank a lonely flower he spied, A meek and forlorn flower, with naught of pride, Drooping its beauty o'er the watery clearness, To woo its own sad image into nearness: Deaf to light Zephyrus it would not move; But still would seem to droop, to pine, to love.
So while the poet stood in this sweet spot, Some fainter gleamings o'er his fancy shot; Nor was it long ere he had told the tale Of young Narcissus, and sad Echo's bale.
Where had he been, from whose warm head out-flew That sweetest of all songs, that ever new, That aye refreshing, pure deliciousness, Coming ever to bless The wanderer by moonlight?
to him bringing Shapes from the invisible world, unearthly singing From out the middle air, from flowery nests, And from the pillowy silkiness that rests Full in the speculation of the stars.
Ah!
surely he had burst our mortal bars; Into some wond'rous region he had gone, To search for thee, divine Endymion!
He was a Poet, sure a lover too, Who stood on Latmus' top, what time there blew Soft breezes from the myrtle vale below; And brought in faintness solemn, sweet, and slow A hymn from Dian's temple; while upswelling, The incense went to her own starry dwelling.
But though her face was clear as infant's eyes, Though she stood smiling o'er the sacrifice, The Poet wept at her so piteous fate, Wept that such beauty should be desolate: So in fine wrath some golden sounds he won, And gave meek Cynthia her Endymion.
Queen of the wide air; thou most lovely queen Of all the brightness that mine eyes have seen!
As thou exceedest all things in thy shine, So every tale, does this sweet tale of thine.
O for three words of honey, that I might Tell but one wonder of thy bridal night!
Where distant ships do seem to show their keels, Phoebus awhile delay'd his mighty wheels, And turn'd to smile upon thy bashful eyes, Ere he his unseen pomp would solemnize.
The evening weather was so bright, and clear, That men of health were of unusual cheer; Stepping like Homer at the trumpet's call, Or young Apollo on the pedestal: And lovely women were as fair and warm, As Venus looking sideways in alarm.
The breezes were ethereal, and pure, And crept through half-closed lattices to cure The languid sick; it cool'd their fever'd sleep, And soothed them into slumbers full and deep.
Soon they awoke clear eyed: nor burnt with thirsting, Nor with hot fingers, nor with temples bursting: And springing up, they met the wond'ring sight Of their dear friends, nigh foolish with delight; Who feel their arms, and breasts, and kiss and stare, And on their placid foreheads part the hair.
Young men, and maidens at each other gaz'd With hands held back, and motionless, amaz'd To see the brightness in each other's eyes; And so they stood, fill'd with a sweet surprise, Until their tongues were loos'd in poesy.
Therefore no lover did of anguish die: But the soft numbers, in that moment spoken, Made silken ties, that never may be broken.
Cynthia!
I cannot tell the greater blisses, That follow'd thine, and thy dear shepherd's kisses: Was there a poet born?- but now no more, My wand'ring spirit must no further soar.- IMITATION OF SPENSER Now Morning from her orient chamber came, And her first footsteps touch'd a verdant hill; Crowning its lawny crest with amber flame, Silv'ring the untainted gushes of its rill; Which, pure from mossy beds, did down distill, And after parting beds of simple flowers, By many streams a little lake did fill, Which round its marge reflected woven bowers, And, in its middle space, a sky that never lowers.
There the king-fisher saw his plumage bright Vieing with fish of brilliant dye below; Whose silken fins, and golden scales' light Cast upward, through the waves, a ruby glow: There saw the swan his neck of arched snow, And oar'd himself along with majesty; Sparkled his jetty eyes; his feet did show Beneath the waves like Afric's ebony, And on his back a fay reclined voluptuously.
Ah!
could I tell the wonders of an isle That in that fairest lake had placed been, I could e'en Dido of her grief beguile; Or rob from aged Lear his bitter teen: For sure so fair a place was never seen, Of all that ever charm'd romantic eye: It seem'd an emerald in the silver sheen Of the bright waters; or as when on high, Through clouds of fleecy white, laughs the coerulean sky.
And all around it dipp'd luxuriously Slopings of verdure through the glossy tide, Which, as it were in gentle amity, Rippled delighted up the flowery side; As if to glean the ruddy tears, it tried, Which fell profusely from the rose-tree stem!
Haply it was the workings of its pride, In strife to throw upon the shore a gem Outvieing all the buds in Flora's diadem.
ISABELLA; OR, THE POT OF BASIL ISABELLA A Story from Boccaccio I.
Fair Isabel, poor simple Isabel!
Lorenzo, a young palmer in Love's eye!
They could not in the self-same mansion dwell Without some stir of heart, some malady; They could not sit at meals but feel how well It soothed each to be the other by; They could not, sure, beneath the same roof sleep But to each other dream, and nightly weep.
With every morn their love grew tenderer, With every eve deeper and tenderer still; He might not in house, field, or garden stir, But her full shape would all his seeing fill; And his continual voice was pleasanter To her, than noise of trees or hidden rill; Her lute-string gave an echo of his name, She spoilt her half-done broidery with the same.
He knew whose gentle hand was at the latch Before the door had given her to his eyes; And from her chamber-window he would catch Her beauty farther than the falcon spies; And constant as her vespers would he watch, Because her face was turn'd to the same skies; And with sick longing all the night outwear, To hear her morning-step upon the stair.
A whole long month of May in this sad plight Made their cheeks paler by the break of June: "To-morrow will I bow to my delight, "To-morrow will I ask my lady's boon."- "O may I never see another night, "Lorenzo, if thy lips breathe not love's tune."- So spake they to their pillows; but, alas, Honeyless days and days did he let pass; V.
Until sweet Isabella's untouch'd cheek Fell sick within the rose's just domain, Fell thin as a young mother's, who doth seek By every lull to cool her infant's pain: "How ill she is," said he, "I may not speak, "And yet I will, and tell my love all plain: "If looks speak love-laws, I will drink her tears, "And at the least 'twill startle off her cares."
So said he one fair morning, and all day His heart beat awfully against his side; And to his heart he inwardly did pray For power to speak; but still the ruddy tide Stifled his voice, and puls'd resolve away- Fever'd his high conceit of such a bride, Yet brought him to the meekness of a child: Alas!
when passion is both meek and wild!
So once more he had wak'd and anguished A dreary night of love and misery, If Isabel's quick eye had not been wed To every symbol on his forehead high; She saw it waxing very pale and dead, And straight all flush'd; so, lisped tenderly, "Lorenzo!"- here she ceas'd her timid quest, But in her tone and look he read the rest.
"O Isabella, I can half perceive "That I may speak my grief into thine ear; "If thou didst ever anything believe, "Believe how I love thee, believe how near "My soul is to its doom: I would not grieve "Thy hand by unwelcome pressing, would not fear "Thine eyes by gazing; but I cannot live "Another night, and not my passion shrive.
"Love!
thou art leading me from wintry cold, "Lady!
thou leadest me to summer clime, "And I must taste the blossoms that unfold "In its ripe warmth this gracious morning time."
So said, his erewhile timid lips grew bold, And poesied with hers in dewy rhyme: Great bliss was with them, and great happiness Grew, like a lusty flower in June's caress.
Parting they seem'd to tread upon the air, Twin roses by the zephyr blown apart Only to meet again more close, and share The inward fragrance of each other's heart.
She, to her chamber gone, a ditty fair Sang, of delicious love and honey'd dart; He with light steps went up a western hill, And bade the sun farewell, and joy'd his fill.
All close they met again, before the dusk Had taken from the stars its pleasant veil, All close they met, all eves, before the dusk Had taken from the stars its pleasant veil, Close in a bower of hyacinth and musk, Unknown of any, free from whispering tale.
Ah!
better had it been for ever so, Than idle ears should pleasure in their woe.
Were they unhappy then?- It cannot be- Too many tears for lovers have been shed, Too many sighs give we to them in fee, Too much of pity after they are dead, Too many doleful stories do we see, Whose matter in bright gold were best be read; Except in such a page where Theseus' spouse Over the pathless waves towards him bows.
But, for the general award of love, The little sweet doth kill much bitterness; Though Dido silent is in under-grove, And Isabella's was a great distress, Though young Lorenzo in warm Indian clove Was not embalm'd, this truth is not the less- Even bees, the little almsmen of spring-bowers, Know there is richest juice in poison-flowers.
With her two brothers this fair lady dwelt, Enriched from ancestral merchandize, And for them many a weary hand did swelt In torched mines and noisy factories, And many once proud-quiver'd loins did melt In blood from stinging whip;- with hollow eyes Many all day in dazzling river stood, To take the rich-ored driftings of the flood.
For them the Ceylon diver held his breath, And went all naked to the hungry shark; For them his ears gush'd blood; for them in death The seal on the cold ice with piteous bark Lay full of darts; for them alone did seethe A thousand men in troubles wide and dark: Half-ignorant, they turn'd an easy wheel, That set sharp racks at work, to pinch and peel.
Why were they proud?
Because their marble founts Gush'd with more pride than do a wretch's tears?- Why were they proud?
Because fair orange-mounts Were of more soft ascent than lazar stairs?- Why were they proud?
Because red-lin'd accounts Were richer than the songs of Grecian years?- Why were they proud?
again we ask aloud, Why in the name of Glory were they proud?
Yet were these Florentines as self-retired In hungry pride and gainful cowardice, As two close Hebrews in that land inspired, Paled in and vineyarded from beggar-spies; The hawks of ship-mast forests- the untired And pannier'd mules for ducats and old lies- Quick cat's-paws on the generous stray-away,- Great wits in Spanish, Tuscan, and Malay.
How was it these same ledger-men could spy Fair Isabella in her downy nest?
How could they find out in Lorenzo's eye A straying from his toil?
Hot Egypt's pest Into their vision covetous and sly!
How could these money-bags see east and west?- Yet so they did- and every dealer fair Must see behind, as doth the hunted hare.
O eloquent and famed Boccaccio!
Of thee we now should ask forgiving boon, And of thy spicy myrtles as they blow, And of thy roses amorous of the moon, And of thy lillies, that do paler grow Now they can no more hear thy ghittern's tune, For venturing syllables that ill beseem The quiet glooms of such a piteous theme.
Grant thou a pardon here, and then the tale Shall move on soberly, as it is meet; There is no other crime, no mad assail To make old prose in modern rhyme more sweet: But it is done- succeed the verse or fail- To honour thee, and thy gone spirit greet; To stead thee as a verse in English tongue, An echo of thee in the north-wind sung.
These brethren having found by many signs What love Lorenzo for their sister had, And how she lov'd him too, each unconfines His bitter thoughts to other, well nigh mad That he, the servant of their trade designs, Should in their sister's love be blithe and glad, When 'twas their plan to coax her by degrees To some high noble and his olive-trees.
And many a jealous conference had they, And many times they bit their lips alone, Before they fix'd upon a surest way To make the youngster for his crime atone; And at the last, these men of cruel clay Cut Mercy with a sharp knife to the bone; For they resolved in some forest dim To kill Lorenzo, and there bury him.
So on a pleasant morning, as he leant Into the sun-rise, o'er the balustrade Of the garden-terrace, towards him they bent Their footing through the dews; and to him said, "You seem there in the quiet of content, "Lorenzo, and we are most loth to invade "Calm speculation; but if you are wise, "Bestride your steed while cold is in the skies.
"To-day we purpose, aye, this hour we mount "To spur three leagues towards the Apennine; "Come down, we pray thee, ere the hot sun count "His dewy rosary on the eglantine."
Lorenzo, courteously as he was wont, Bow'd a fair greeting to these serpents' whine; And went in haste, to get in readiness, With belt, and spur, and bracing huntsman's dress.
And as he to the court-yard pass'd along, Each third step did he pause, and listen'd oft If he could hear his lady's matin-song, Or the light whisper of her footstep soft; And as he thus over his passion hung, He heard a laugh full musical aloft; When, looking up, he saw her features bright Smile through an in-door lattice, all delight.
"Love, Isabel!"
said he, "I was in pain "Lest I should miss to bid thee a good morrow: "Ah!
what if I should lose thee, when so fain "I am to stifle all the heavy sorrow "Of a poor three hours' absence?
but we'll gain "Out of the amorous dark what day doth borrow.
"Good bye!
I'll soon be back."- "Good bye!"
said she:- And as he went she chanted merrily.
So the two brothers and their murder'd man Rode past fair Florence, to where Arno's stream Gurgles through straiten'd banks, and still doth fan Itself with dancing bulrush, and the bream Keeps head against the freshets.
Sick and wan The brothers' faces in the ford did seem, Lorenzo's flush with love.- They pass'd the water Into a forest quiet for the slaughter.
There was Lorenzo slain and buried in, There in that forest did his great love cease; Ah!
when a soul doth thus its freedom win, It aches in loneliness- is ill at peace As the break-covert blood-hounds of such sin: They dipp'd their swords in the water, and did tease Their horses homeward, with convulsed spur, Each richer by his being a murderer.
They told their sister how, with sudden speed, Lorenzo had ta'en ship for foreign lands, Because of some great urgency and need In their affairs, requiring trusty hands.
Poor Girl!
put on thy stifling widow's weed, And 'scape at once from Hope's accursed bands; To-day thou wilt not see him, nor to-morrow, And the next day will be a day of sorrow.
She weeps alone for pleasures not to be; Sorely she wept until the night came on, And then, instead of love, O misery!
She brooded o'er the luxury alone: His image in the dusk she seem'd to see, And to the silence made a gentle moan, Spreading her perfect arms upon the air, And on her couch low murmuring "Where?
O where?"
But Selfishness, Love's cousin, held not long Its fiery vigil in her single breast; She fretted for the golden hour, and hung Upon the time with feverish unrest- Not long- for soon into her heart a throng Of higher occupants, a richer zest, Came tragic; passion not to be subdued, And sorrow for her love in travels rude.
In the mid days of autumn, on their eves The breath of Winter comes from far away, And the sick west continually bereaves Of some gold tinge, and plays a roundelay Of death among the bushes and the leaves, To make all bare before he dares to stray From his north cavern.
So sweet Isabel By gradual decay from beauty fell, XXXIII.
Because Lorenzo came not.
Oftentimes She ask'd her brothers, with an eye all pale, Striving to be itself, what dungeon climes Could keep him off so long?
They spake a tale Time after time, to quiet her.
Their crimes Came on them, like a smoke from Hinnom's vale; And every night in dreams they groan'd aloud, To see their sister in her snowy shroud.
And she had died in drowsy ignorance, But for a thing more deadly dark than all; It came like a fierce potion, drunk by chance, Which saves a sick man from the feather'd pall For some few gasping moments; like a lance, Waking an Indian from his cloudy hall With cruel pierce, and bringing him again Sense of the gnawing fire at heart and brain.
It was a vision.- In the drowsy gloom, The dull of midnight, at her couch's foot Lorenzo stood, and wept: the forest tomb Had marr'd his glossy hair which once could shoot Lustre into the sun, and put cold doom Upon his lips, and taken the soft lute From his lorn voice, and past his loamed ears Had made a miry channel for his tears.
Strange sound it was, when the pale shadow spake; For there was striving, in its piteous tongue, To speak as when on earth it was awake, And Isabella on its music hung: Languor there was in it, and tremulous shake, As in a palsied Druid's harp unstrung; And through it moan'd a ghostly under-song, Like hoarse night-gusts sepulchral briars among.
Its eyes, though wild, were still all dewy bright With love, and kept all phantom fear aloof From the poor girl by magic of their light, The while it did unthread the horrid woof Of the late darken'd time,- the murderous spite Of pride and avarice,- the dark pine roof In the forest,- and the sodden turfed dell, Where, without any word, from stabs he fell.
Saying moreover, "Isabel, my sweet!
"Red whortle-berries droop above my head, "And a large flint-stone weighs upon my feet; "Around me beeches and high chestnuts shed "Their leaves and prickly nuts; a sheep-fold bleat "Comes from beyond the river to my bed: "Go, shed one tear upon my heather-bloom, "And it shall comfort me within the tomb.
"I am a shadow now, alas!
alas!
"Upon the skirts of human-nature dwelling "Alone: I chant alone the holy mass, "While little sounds of life are round me knelling, "And glossy bees at noon do fieldward pass, "And many a chapel bell the hour is telling, "Paining me through: those sounds grow strange to me, "And thou art distant in Humanity.
"I know what was, I feel full well what is, "And I should rage, if spirits could go mad; "Though I forget the taste of earthly bliss, "That paleness warms my grave, as though I had "A Seraph chosen from the bright abyss "To be my spouse: thy paleness makes me glad; "Thy beauty grows upon me, and I feel "A greater love through all my essence steal."
The Spirit mourn'd "Adieu!"- dissolv'd and left The atom darkness in a slow turmoil; As when of healthful midnight sleep bereft, Thinking on rugged hours and fruitless toil, We put our eyes into a pillowy cleft, And see the spangly gloom froth up and boil: It made sad Isabella's eyelids ache, And in the dawn she started up awake; XLII.
"Ha!
ha!"
said she, "I knew not this hard life, "I thought the worst was simple misery; "I thought some Fate with pleasure or with strife "Portion'd us- happy days, or else to die; "But there is crime- a brother's bloody knife!
"Sweet Spirit, thou hast school'd my infancy: "I'll visit thee for this, and kiss thine eyes, "And greet thee morn and even in the skies."
When the full morning came, she had devised How she might secret to the forest hie; How she might find the day, so dearly prized, And sing to it one latest lullaby; How her short absence might be unsurmised, While she the inmost of the dream would try.
Resolv'd, she took with her an aged nurse, And went into that dismal forest-hearse.
See, as they creep along the river side, How she doth whisper to that aged Dame, And, after looking round the champaign wide, Shows her a knife.- "What feverous hectic flame "Burns in thee, child?- What good can thee betide, "That thou should'st smile again?"- The evening came, And they had found Lorenzo's earthy bed; The flint was there, the berries at his head.
Who hath not loiter'd in a green church-yard, And let his spirit, like a demon-mole, Work through the clayey soil and gravel hard, To see scull, coffin'd bones, and funeral stole; Pitying each form that hungry Death hath marr'd And filling it once more with human soul?
Ah!
this is holiday to what was felt When Isabella by Lorenzo knelt.
She gaz'd into the fresh-thrown mould, as though One glance did fully all its secrets tell; Clearly she saw, as other eyes would know Pale limbs at bottom of a crystal well; Upon the murderous spot she seem'd to grow, Like to a native lilly of the dell: Then with her knife, all sudden, she began To dig more fervently than misers can.
Soon she turn'd up a soiled glove, whereon Her silk had play'd in purple phantasies, She kiss'd it with a lip more chill than stone, And put it in her bosom, where it dries And freezes utterly unto the bone Those dainties made to still an infant's cries: Then 'gan she work again; nor stay'd her care, But to throw back at times her veiling hair.
That old nurse stood beside her wondering, Until her heart felt pity to the core At sight of such a dismal labouring, And so she kneeled, with her locks all hoar, And put her lean hands to the horrid thing: Three hours they labour'd at this travail sore; At last they felt the kernel of the grave, And Isabella did not stamp and rave.
Ah!
wherefore all this wormy circumstance?
Why linger at the yawning tomb so long?
O for the gentleness of old Romance, The simple plaining of a minstrel's song!
Fair reader, at the old tale take a glance, For here, in truth, it doth not well belong To speak:- O turn thee to the very tale, And taste the music of that vision pale.
With duller steel than the Persean sword They cut away no formless monster's head, But one, whose gentleness did well accord With death, as life.
The ancient harps have said, Love never dies, but lives, immortal Lord: If Love impersonate was ever dead, Pale Isabella kiss'd it, and low moan'd.
'Twas love; cold,- dead indeed, but not dethroned.
In anxious secrecy they took it home, And then the prize was all for Isabel: She calm'd its wild hair with a golden comb, And all around each eye's sepulchral cell Pointed each fringed lash; the smeared loam With tears, as chilly as a dripping well, She drench'd away:- and still she comb'd, and kept Sighing all day- and still she kiss'd, and wept.
Then in a silken scarf,- sweet with the dews Of precious flowers pluck'd in Araby, And divine liquids come with odorous ooze Through the cold serpent-pipe refreshfully,- She wrapp'd it up; and for its tomb did choose A garden-pot, wherein she laid it by, And cover'd it with mould, and o'er it set Sweet Basil, which her tears kept ever wet.
And she forgot the stars, the moon, and sun, And she forgot the blue above the trees, And she forgot the dells where waters run, And she forgot the chilly autumn breeze; She had no knowledge when the day was done, And the new morn she saw not: but in peace Hung over her sweet Basil evermore, And moisten'd it with tears unto the core.
And so she ever fed it with thin tears, Whence thick, and green, and beautiful it grew, So that it smelt more balmy than its peers Of Basil-tufts in Florence; for it drew Nurture besides, and life, from human fears, From the fast mouldering head there shut from view: So that the jewel, safely casketed, Came forth, and in perfumed leafits spread.
O Melancholy, linger here awhile!
O Music, Music, breathe despondingly!
O Echo, Echo, from some sombre isle, Unknown, Lethean, sigh to us- O sigh!
Spirits in grief, lift up your heads, and smile; Lift up your heads, sweet Spirits, heavily, And make a pale light in your cypress glooms, Tinting with silver wan your marble tombs.
Moan hither, all ye syllables of woe, From the deep throat of sad Melpomene!
Through bronzed lyre in tragic order go, And touch the strings into a mystery; Sound mournfully upon the winds and low; For simple Isabel is soon to be Among the dead: She withers, like a palm Cut by an Indian for its juicy balm.
O leave the palm to wither by itself; Let not quick Winter chill its dying hour!- It may not be- those Baalites of pelf, Her brethren, noted the continual shower From her dead eyes; and many a curious elf, Among her kindred, wonder'd that such dower Of youth and beauty should be thrown aside By one mark'd out to be a Noble's bride.
And, furthermore, her brethren wonder'd much Why she sat drooping by the Basil green, And why it flourish'd, as by magic touch; Greatly they wonder'd what the thing might mean: They could not surely give belief, that such A very nothing would have power to wean Her from her own fair youth, and pleasures gay, And even remembrance of her love's delay.
Therefore they watch'd a time when they might sift This hidden whim; and long they watch'd in vain; For seldom did she go to chapel-shrift, And seldom felt she any hunger-pain; And when she left, she hurried back, as swift As bird on wing to breast its eggs again; And, patient as a hen-bird, sat her there Beside her Basil, weeping through her hair.
Yet they contriv'd to steal the Basil-pot, And to examine it in secret place; The thing was vile with green and livid spot, And yet they knew it was Lorenzo's face: The guerdon of their murder they had got, And so left Florence in a moment's space, Never to turn again.- Away they went, With blood upon their heads, to banishment.
O Melancholy, turn thine eyes away!
O Music, Music, breathe despondingly!
O Echo, Echo, on some other day, From isles Lethean, sigh to us- O sigh!
Spirits of grief, sing not your "Well-a-way!"
For Isabel, sweet Isabel, will die; Will die a death too lone and incomplete, Now they have ta'en away her Basil sweet.
Piteous she look'd on dead and senseless things, Asking for her lost Basil amorously; And with melodious chuckle in the strings Of her lorn voice, she oftentimes would cry After the Pilgrim in his wanderings, To ask him where her Basil was; and why 'Twas hid from her: "For cruel 'tis," said she, "To steal my Basil-pot away from me."
And so she pined, and so she died forlorn, Imploring for her Basil to the last.
No heart was there in Florence but did mourn In pity of her love, so overcast.
And a sad ditty of this story born From mouth to mouth through all the country pass'd: Still is the burthen sung- "O cruelty, "To steal my Basil-pot away from me!"
The Gothic looks solemn, The plain Doric column Supports an old Bishop and Crosier; The mouldering arch, Shaded o'er by a larch Stands next door to Wilson the Hosier.
Vice- that is, by turns,- O'er pale faces mourns The black tassell'd trencher and common hat; The Chantry boy sings, The Steeple-bell rings, And as for the Chancellor- dominat.
There are plenty of trees, And plenty of ease, And plenty of fat deer for Parsons; And when it is venison, Short is the benison,- Then each on a leg or thigh fastens.
O SOLITUDE!
IF I MUST WITH THEE DWELL O Solitude!
if I must with thee dwell, Let it not be among the jumbled heap Of murky buildings; climb with me the steep,- Nature's observatory- whence the dell, Its flowery slopes, its river's crystal swell, May seem a span; let me thy vigils keep 'Mongst boughs pavillion'd, where the deer's swift leap Startles the wild bee from the fox-glove bell.
But though I'll gladly trace these scenes with thee, Yet the sweet converse of an innocent mind, Whose words are images of thoughts refin'd, Is my soul's pleasure; and it sure must be Almost the highest bliss of human-kind, When to thy haunts two kindred spirits flee.
ODE ("BARDS OF PASSION AND OF MIRTH") ODE Bards of Passion and of Mirth, Ye have left your souls on earth!
Have ye souls in heaven too, Double-lived in regions new?
Yes, and those of heaven commune With the spheres of sun and moon; With the noise of fountains wond'rous, And the parle of voices thund'rous; With the whisper of heaven's trees And one another, in soft ease Seated on Elysian lawns Brows'd by none but Dian's fawns; Underneath large blue-bells tented, Where the daisies are rose-scented, And the rose herself has got Perfume which on earth is not; Where the nightingale doth sing Not a senseless, tranced thing, But divine melodious truth; Philosophic numbers smooth; Tales and golden histories Of heaven and its mysteries.
Thus ye live on high, and then On the earth ye live again; And the souls ye left behind you Teach us, here, the way to find you, Where your other souls are joying, Never slumber'd, never cloying.
Here, your earth-born souls still speak To mortals, of their little week; Of their sorrows and delights; Of their passions and their spites; Of their glory and their shame; What doth strengthen and what maim.
Thus ye teach us, every day, Wisdom, though fled far away.
Bards of Passion and of Mirth, Ye have left your souls on earth!
Ye have souls in heaven too, Double-lived in regions new!
ODE ON INDOLENCE They toil not, neither do they spin.
One morn before me were three figures seen, With bowed necks, and joined hands, side-faced; And one behind the other stepp'd serene, In placid sandals, and in white robes graced; They pass'd, like figures on a marble urn When shifted round to see the other side; They came again, as, when the urn once more Is shifted round, the first seen shades return; And they were strange to me, as may betide With vases, to one deep in Phidian lore.
How is it, Shadows!
that I knew ye not?
How came ye muffled in so hush a masque?
Was it a silent deep-disguised plot To steal away, and leave without a task My idle days?
Ripe was the drowsy hour; The blissful cloud of summer-indolence Benumb'd my eyes; my pulse grew less and less; Pain had no sting, and pleasure's wreath no flower: O, why did ye not melt, and leave my sense Unhaunted quite of all but-nothingness?
A third time came they by;- alas!
wherefore?
My sleep had been embroider'd with dim dreams; My soul had been a lawn besprinkled o'er With flowers, and stirring shades, and baffled beams: The morn was clouded, but no shower fell, Though in her lids hung the sweet tears of May; The open casement press'd a new-leav'd vine, Let in the budding warmth and throstle's lay; O Shadows!
'twas a time to bid farewell!
Upon your skirts had fallen no tears of mine.
A third time pass'd they by, and, passing, turn'd Each one the face a moment whiles to me; Then faded, and to follow them I burn'd And ach'd for wings because I knew the three; The first was a fair Maid, and Love her name; The second was Ambition, pale of cheek, And ever watchful with fatigued eye; The last, whom I love more, the more of blame Is heap'd upon her, maiden most unmeek,- I knew to be my demon Poesy.
They faded, and, forsooth!
I wanted wings: O folly!
What is love!
and where is it?
And for that poor Ambition!
it springs From a man's little heart's short fever-fit; For Poesy!- no,- she has not a joy,- At least for me,- so sweet as drowsy noons, And evenings steep'd in honied indolence; O, for an age so shelter'd from annoy, That I may never know how change the moons, Or hear the voice of busy common-sense!
So, ye three Ghosts, adieu!
Ye cannot raise My head cool-bedded in the flowery grass; For I would not be dieted with praise, A pet-lamb in a sentimental farce!
Fade softly from my eyes, and be once more In masque-like figures on the dreamy urn; Farewell!
I yet have visions for the night, And for the day faint visions there is store; Vanish, ye Phantoms!
from my idle spright, Into the clouds, and never more return!
ODE ON MELANCHOLY I.
No, no, go not to Lethe, neither twist Wolf's-bane, tight-rooted, for its poisonous wine; Nor suffer thy pale forehead to be kiss'd By nightshade, ruby grape of Proserpine; Make not your rosary of yew-berries, Nor let the beetle, nor the death-moth be Your mournful Psyche, nor the downy owl A partner in your sorrow's mysteries; For shade to shade will come too drowsily, And drown the wakeful anguish of the soul.
But when the melancholy fit shall fall Sudden from heaven like a weeping cloud, That fosters the droop-headed flowers all, And hides the green hill in an April shroud; Then glut thy sorrow on a morning rose, Or on the rainbow of the salt sand-wave, Or on the wealth of globed peonies; Or if thy mistress some rich anger shows, Emprison her soft hand, and let her rave, And feed deep, deep upon her peerless eyes.
She dwells with Beauty- Beauty that must die; And Joy, whose hand is ever at his lips Bidding adieu; and aching Pleasure nigh, Turning to Poison while the bee-mouth sips: Ay, in the very temple of delight Veil'd Melancholy has her sovran shrine, Though seen of none save him whose strenuous tongue Can burst Joy's grape against his palate fine; His soul shall taste the sadness of her might, And be among her cloudy trophies hung.
ODE TO PSYCHE O Goddess!
hear these tuneless numbers, wrung By sweet enforcement and remembrance dear, And pardon that thy secrets should be sung Even into thine own soft-conched ear: Surely I dreamt to-day, or did I see The winged Psyche with awaken'd eyes?
I wander'd in a forest thoughtlessly, And, on the sudden, fainting with surprise, Saw two fair creatures, couched side by side In deepest grass, beneath the whisp'ring roof Of leaves and trembled blossoms, where there ran A brooklet, scarce espied: 'Mid hush'd, cool-rooted flowers, fragrant-eyed, Blue, silver-white, and budded Tyrian, They lay calm-breathing on the bedded grass; Their arms embraced, and their pinions too; Their lips touch'd not, but had not bade adieu, As if disjoined by soft-handed slumber, And ready still past kisses to outnumber At tender eye-dawn of aurorean love: The winged boy I knew; But who wast thou, O happy, happy dove?
His Psyche true!
O latest born and loveliest vision far Of all Olympus' faded hierarchy!
Fairer than Phoebe's sapphire-region'd star, Or Vesper, amorous glow-worm of the sky; Fairer than these, though temple thou hast none, Nor altar heap'd with flowers; Nor virgin-choir to make delicious moan Upon the midnight hours; No voice, no lute, no pipe, no incense sweet From chain-swung censer teeming; No shrine, no grove, no oracle, no heat Of pale-mouth'd prophet dreaming.
O brightest!
though too late for antique vows, Too, too late for the fond believing lyre, When holy were the haunted forest boughs, Holy the air, the water, and the fire; Yet even in these days so far retir'd From happy pieties, thy lucent fans, Fluttering among the faint Olympians, I see, and sing, by my own eyes inspir'd.
So let me be thy choir, and make a moan Upon the midnight hours; Thy voice, thy lute, thy pipe, thy incense sweet From swinged censer teeming; Thy shrine, thy grove, thy oracle, thy heat Of pale-mouth'd prophet dreaming.
Yes, I will be thy priest, and build a fane In some untrodden region of my mind, Where branched thoughts, new grown with pleasant pain, Instead of pines shall murmur in the wind: Far, far around shall those dark-cluster'd trees Fledge the wild-ridged mountains steep by steep; And there by zephyrs, streams, and birds, and bees, The moss-lain Dryads shall be lull'd to sleep; And in the midst of this wide quietness A rosy sanctuary will I dress With the wreath'd trellis of a working brain, With buds, and bells, and stars without a name, With all the gardener Fancy e'er could feign, Who breeding flowers, will never breed the same: And there shall be for thee all soft delight That shadowy thought can win, A bright torch, and a casement ope at night, To let the warm Love in!
ON A DREAM As Hermes once took to his feathers light When lulled Argus, baffled, swoon'd and slept, So on a Delphic reed my idle spright So play'd, so charm'd, so conquer'd, so bereft The dragon-world of all its hundred eyes, And, seeing it asleep, so fled away: Not to pure Ida with its snow-cold skies, Nor unto Tempe where Jove griev'd a day; But to that second circle of sad hell, Where 'mid the gust, the whirlwind, and the flaw Of rain and hail-stones, lovers need not tell Their sorrows.
Pale were the sweet lips I saw, Pale were the lips I kiss'd, and fair the form I floated with, about that melancholy storm.
ON FIRST LOOKING INTO CHAPMAN'S HOMER Much have I travell'd in the realms of gold, And many goodly states and kingdoms seen; Round many western islands have I been Which bards in fealty to Apollo hold.
Oft of one wide expanse had I been told That deep-brow'd Homer ruled as his demesne; Yet did I never breathe its pure serene Till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold: Then felt I like some watcher of the skies When a new planet swims into his ken; Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes He star'd at the Pacific- and all his men Look'd at each other with a wild surmise- Silent, upon a peak in Darien.
ON SITTING DOWN TO READ KING LEAR ONCE AGAIN O golden tongued Romance, with serene lute!
Fair plumed Syren, Queen of far-away!
Leave melodizing on this wintry day, Shut up thine olden pages, and be mute: Adieu!
for once again the fierce dispute Betwixt damnation and impassion'd clay Must I burn through; once more humbly assay The bitter-sweet of this Shakespearian fruit.
Chief Poet!
and ye clouds of Albion, Begetters of our deep eternal theme!
When through the old oak Forest I am gone, Let me not wander in a barren dream, But when I am consumed in the fire, Give me new Phoenix wings to fly at my desire.
ON VISITING THE TOMB OF BURNS The town, the churchyard, and the setting sun, The clouds, the trees, the rounded hills all seem, Though beautiful, cold- strange- as in a dream I dreamed long ago, now new begun.
The short-liv'd, paly summer is but won From winter's ague for one hour's gleam; Through sapphire warm their stars do never beam: All is cold Beauty; pain is never done.
For who has mind to relish, Minos-wise, The real of Beauty, free from that dead hue Sickly imagination and sick pride Cast wan upon it?
Burns!
with honour due I oft have honour'd thee.
Great shadow, hide Thy face; I sin against thy native skies.
OVER THE HILL AND OVER THE DALE Over the hill and over the dale, And over the bourn to Dawlish- Where gingerbread wives have a scanty sale And gingerbread nuts are smallish.
Rantipole Betty she ran down a hill And kicked up her petticoats fairly; Says I I'll be Jack if you will be Gill- So she sat on the grass debonairly.
Here's somebody coming, here's somebody coming!
Says I 'tis the wind at a parley; So without any fuss any hawing and humming She lay on the grass debonairly.
Here's somebody here and here's somebody there!
Says I hold your tongue you young Gipsey; So she held her tongue and lay plump and fair And dead as a Venus tipsy.
O who wouldn't hie to Dawlish fair, O who wouldn't stop in a Meadow, O who would not rumple the daisies there And make the wild fern for a bed do!
THE POET A FRAGMENT Where's the Poet?
show him!
show him, Muses nine!
that I may know him!
'Tis the man who with a man Is an equal, be he King Or poorest of the beggar-clan, Or any other wondrous thing A man may be 'twixt ape and Plato; 'Tis the man who with a bird, Wren or eagle, finds his way to All its instincts; he hath heard The lion's roaring, and can tell What his horny throat expresseth, And to him the tiger's yell Comes articulate and presseth On his ear like mother-tongue...
SLEEP AND POETRY As I lay in my bed slepe full unmete Was unto me, but why that I ne might Rest I ne wist, for there n'as erthly wight [As I suppose] had more of hertis ese Than I, for I n'ad sicknesse nor disese.
CHAUCER What is more gentle than a wind in summer?
What is more soothing than the pretty hummer That stays one moment in an open flower, And buzzes cheerily from bower to bower?
What is more tranquil than a musk-rose blowing In a green island, far from all men's knowing?
More healthful than the leafiness of dales?
More secret than a nest of nightingales?
More serene than Cordelia's countenance?
More full of visions than a high romance?
What, but thee Sleep?
Soft closer of our eyes!
Low murmurer of tender lullabies!
Light hoverer around our happy pillows!
Wreather of poppy buds, and weeping willows!
Silent entangler of a beauty's tresses!
Most happy listener!
when the morning blesses Thee for enlivening all the cheerful eyes That glance so brightly at the new sun-rise.
But what is higher beyond thought than thee?
Fresher than berries of a mountain tree?
More strange, more beautiful, more smooth, more regal, Than wings of swans, than doves, than dim-seen eagle?
What is it?
And to what shall I compare it?
It has a glory, and naught else can share it: The thought thereof is awful, sweet, and holy, Chasing away all worldliness and folly; Coming sometimes like fearful claps of thunder, Or the low rumblings earth's regions under; And sometimes like a gentle whispering Of all the secrets of some wond'rous thing That breathes about us in the vacant air; So that we look around with prying stare, Perhaps to see shapes of light, aerial limning, And catch soft floatings from a faint-heard hymning; To see the laurel wreath, on high suspended, That is to crown our name when life is ended.
Sometimes it gives a glory to the voice, And from the heart up-springs, rejoice!
rejoice!
Sounds which will reach the Framer of all things, And die away in ardent mutterings.
No one who once the glorious sun has seen, And all the clouds, and felt his bosom clean For his great Maker's presence, but must know What 'tis I mean, and feel his being glow: Therefore no insult will I give his spirit, By telling what he sees from native merit.
O Poesy!
for thee I hold my pen That am not yet a glorious denizen Of thy wide heaven- Should I rather kneel Upon some mountain-top until I feel A glowing splendour round about me hung, And echo back the voice of thine own tongue?
O Poesy!
for thee I grasp my pen That am not yet a glorious denizen Of thy wide heaven; yet, to my ardent prayer, Yield from thy sanctuary some clear air, Smooth'd for intoxication by the breath Of flowering bays, that I may die a death Of luxury, and my young spirit follow The morning sun-beams to the great Apollo Like a fresh sacrifice; or, if I can bear The o'erwhelming sweets, 'twill bring to me the fair Visions of all places: a bowery nook Will be elysium- an eternal book Whence I may copy many a lovely saying About the leaves, and flowers- about the playing Of nymphs in woods, and fountains; and the shade Keeping a silence round a sleeping maid; And many a verse from so strange influence That we must ever wonder how, and whence It came.
Also imaginings will hover Round my fire-side, and haply there discover Vistas of solemn beauty, where I'd wander In happy silence, like the clear Meander Through its lone vales; and where I found a spot Of awfuller shade, or an enchanted grot, Or a green hill o'erspread with chequer'd dress Of flowers, and fearful from its loveliness, Write on my tablets all that was permitted, All that was for our human senses fitted.
Then the events of this wide world I'd seize Like a strong giant, and my spirit teaze Till at its shoulders it should proudly see Wings to find out an immortality.
Stop and consider!
life is but a day; A fragile dew-drop on its perilous way From a tree's summit; a poor Indian's sleep While his boat hastens to the monstrous steep Of Montmorenci.
Why so sad a moan?
Life is the rose's hope while yet unblown; The reading of an ever-changing tale; The light uplifting of a maiden's veil; A pigeon tumbling in clear summer air; A laughing school-boy, without grief or care, Riding the springy branches of an elm.
O for ten years, that I may overwhelm Myself in poesy; so I may do the deed That my own soul has to itself decreed.
Then will I pass the countries that I see In long perspective, and continually Taste their pure fountains.
First the realm I'll pass Of Flora, and old Pan: sleep in the grass, Feed upon apples red, and strawberries, And choose each pleasure that my fancy sees; Catch the white-handed nymphs in shady places, To woo sweet kisses from averted faces,- Play with their fingers, touch their shoulders white Into a pretty shrinking with a bite As hard as lips can make it: till agreed, A lovely tale of human life we'll read.
And one will teach a tame dove how it best May fan the cool air gently o'er my rest; Another, bending o'er her nimble tread, Will set a green robe floating round her head, And still will dance with ever varied ease, Smiling upon the flowers and the trees: Another will entice me on, and on Through almond blossoms and rich cinnamon; Till in the bosom of a leafy world We rest in silence, like two gems upcurl'd In the recesses of a pearly shell.
And can I ever bid these joys farewell?
Yes, I must pass them for a nobler life, Where I may find the agonies, the strife Of human hearts: for lo!
I see afar, O'ersailing the blue cragginess, a car And steeds with streamy manes- the charioteer Looks out upon the winds with glorious fear: And now the numerous tramplings quiver lightly Along a huge cloud's ridge; and now with sprightly Wheel downward come they into fresher skies, Tipt round with silver from the sun's bright eyes.
Still downward with capacious whirl they glide; And now I see them on the green-hill's side In breezy rest among the nodding stalks.
The charioteer with wond'rous gesture talks To the trees and mountains; and there soon appear Shapes of delight, of mystery, and fear, Passing along before a dusky space Made by some mighty oaks: as they would chase Some ever- fleeting music on they sweep.
Lo!
how they murmur, laugh, and smile, and weep: Some with upholden hand and mouth severe; Some with their faces muffled to the ear Between their arms; some, clear in youthful bloom, Go glad and smilingly athwart the gloom; Some looking back, and some with upward gaze; Yes, thousands in a thousand different ways Flit onward- now a lovely wreath of girls Dancing their sleek hair into tangled curls; And now broad wings.
Most awfully intent The driver of those steeds is forward bent, And seems to listen: O that I might know All that he writes with such a hurrying glow.
The visions all are fled- the car is fled Into the light of heaven, and in their stead A sense of real things comes doubly strong, And, like a muddy stream, would bear along My soul to nothingness: but I will strive Against all doubtings, and will keep alive The thought of that same chariot, and the strange Journey it went.
Is there so small a range In the present strength of manhood, that the high Imagination cannot freely fly As she was wont of old?
prepare her steeds, Paw up against the light, and do strange deeds Upon the clouds?
Has she not shown us all?
From the clear space of ether, to the small Breath of new buds unfolding?
From the meaning Of Jove's large eye-brow, to the tender greening Of April meadows?
Here her altar shone, E'en in this isle; and who could paragon The fervid choir that lifted up a noise Of harmony, to where it aye will poise Its mighty self of convoluting sound, Huge as a planet, and like that roll round, Eternally around a dizzy void?
Ay, in those days the Muses were nigh cloy'd With honors; nor had any other care Than to sing out and sooth their wavy hair.
Could all this be forgotten?
Yes, a schism Nurtured by foppery and barbarism, Made great Apollo blush for this his land.
Men were thought wise who could not understand His glories: with a puling infant's force They sway'd about upon a rocking horse, And thought it Pegasus.
Ah dismal soul'd!
The winds of heaven blew, the ocean roll'd Its gathering waves- ye felt it not.
The blue Bared its eternal bosom, and the dew Of summer nights collected still to make The morning precious: beauty was awake!
Why were ye not awake?
But ye were dead To things ye knew not of,- were closely wed To musty laws lined out with wretched rule And compass vile: so that ye taught a school Of dolts to smooth, inlay, and clip, and fit, Till, like the certain wands of Jacob's wit, Their verses tallied.
Easy was the task: A thousand handicraftsmen wore the mask Of Poesy.
Ill-fated, impious race!
That blasphemed the bright Lyrist to his face, And did not know it,- no, they went about, Holding a poor, decrepid standard out Mark'd with most flimsy mottos, and in large The name of one Boileau!
O ye whose charge It is to hover round our pleasant hills!
Whose congregated majesty so fills My boundly reverence, that I cannot trace Your hallowed names, in this unholy place, So near those common folk; did not their shames Affright you?
Did our old lamenting Thames Delight you?
Did ye never cluster round Delicious Avon, with a mournful sound, And weep?
Or did ye wholly bid adieu To regions where no more the laurel grew?
Or did ye stay to give a welcoming To some lone spirits who could proudly sing Their youth away, and die?
'Twas even so: But let me think away those times of woe: Now 'tis a fairer season; ye have breathed Rich benedictions o'er us; ye have wreathed Fresh garlands: for sweet music has been heard In many places;- some has been upstirr'd From out its crystal dwelling in a lake, By a swan's ebon bill; from a thick brake, Nested and quiet in a valley mild, Bubbles a pipe; fine sounds are floating wild About the earth: happy are ye and glad.
These things are doubtless: yet in truth we've had Strange thunders from the potency of song; Mingled indeed with what is sweet and strong, From majesty: but in clear truth the themes Are ugly clubs, the Poets' Polyphemes Disturbing the grand sea.
A drainless shower Of light is poesy; 'tis the supreme of power; 'Tis might half slumb'ring on its own right arm.
The very archings of her eye-lids charm A thousand willing agents to obey, And still she governs with the mildest sway: But strength alone though of the Muses born Is like a fallen angel: trees uptorn, Darkness, and worms, and shrouds, and sepulchres Delight it; for it feeds upon the burrs, And thorns of life; forgetting the great end Of poesy, that it should be a friend To sooth the cares, and lift the thoughts of man.
Yet I rejoice: a myrtle fairer than E'er grew in Paphos, from the bitter weeds Lifts its sweet head into the air, and feeds A silent space with ever sprouting green.
All tenderest birds there find a pleasant screen, Creep through the shade with jaunty fluttering, Nibble the little cupped flowers and sing.
Then let us clear away the choking thorns From round its gentle stem; let the young fawns, Yeaned in after times, when we are flown, Find a fresh sward beneath it, overgrown With simple flowers: let there nothing be More boisterous than a lover's bended knee; Nought more ungentle than the placid look Of one who leans upon a closed book; Nought more untranquil than the grassy slopes Between two hills.
All hail delightful hopes!
As she was wont, th' imagination Into most lovely labyrinths will be gone, And they shall be accounted poet kings Who simply tell the most heart-easing things.
O may these joys be ripe before I die.
Will not some say that I presumptuously Have spoken?
that from hastening disgrace 'Twere better far to hide my foolish face?
That whining boyhood should with reverence bow Ere the dread thunderbolt could reach?
How!
If I do hide myself, it sure shall be In the very fane, the light of Poesy: If I do fall, at least I will be laid Beneath the silence of a poplar shade; And over me the grass shall be smooth shaven; And there shall be a kind memorial graven.
But off Despondence!
miserable bane!
They should not know thee, who athirst to gain A noble end, are thirsty every hour.
What though I am not wealthy in the dower Of spanning wisdom; though I do not know The shiftings of the mighty winds that blow Hither and thither all the changing thoughts Of man: though no great minist'ring reason sorts Out the dark mysteries of human souls To clear conceiving: yet there ever rolls A vast idea before me, and I glean Therefrom my liberty; thence too I've seen The end and aim of Poesy.
'Tis clear As anything most true; as that the year Is made of the four seasons- manifest As a large cross, some old cathedral's crest, Lifted to the white clouds.
Therefore should I Be but the essence of deformity, A coward, did my very eye-lids wink At speaking out what I have dared to think.
Ah!
rather let me like a madman run Over some precipice; let the hot sun Melt my Dedalian wings, and drive me down Convuls'd and headlong!
Stay!
an inward frown Of conscience bids me be more calm awhile.
An ocean dim, sprinkled with many an isle, Spreads awfully before me.
How much toil!
How many days!
what desperate turmoil!
Ere I can have explored its widenesses.
Ah, what a task!
upon my bended knees, I could unsay those- no, impossible!
Impossible!
For sweet relief I'll dwell On humbler thoughts, and let this strange assay Begun in gentleness die so away.
E'en now all tumult from my bosom fades: I turn full hearted to the friendly aids That smooth the path of honour; brotherhood, And friendliness the nurse of mutual good.
The hearty grasp that sends a pleasant sonnet Into the brain ere one can think upon it; The silence when some rhymes are coming out; And when they're come, the very pleasant rout: The message certain to be done to-morrow.
'Tis perhaps as well that it should be to borrow Some precious book from out its snug retreat, To cluster round it when we next shall meet.
Scarce can I scribble on; for lovely airs Are fluttering round the room like doves in pairs; Many delights of that glad day recalling, When first my senses caught their tender falling.
And with these airs come forms of elegance Stooping their shoulders o'er a horse's prance, Careless, and grand-fingers soft and round Parting luxuriant curls;- and the swift bound Of Bacchus from his chariot, when his eye Made Ariadne's cheek look blushingly.
Thus I remember all the pleasant flow Of words at opening a portfolio.
Things such as these are ever harbingers To trains of peaceful images: the stirs Of a swan's neck unseen among the rushes: A linnet starting all about the bushes: A butterfly, with golden wings broad parted, Nestling a rose, convuls'd as though it smarted With over pleasure- many, many more, Might I indulge at large in all my store Of luxuries: yet I must not forget Sleep, quiet with his poppy coronet: For what there may be worthy in these rhymes I partly owe to him: and thus, the chimes Of friendly voices had just given place To as sweet a silence, when I 'gan retrace The pleasant day, upon a couch at ease.
It was a poet's house who keeps the keys Of pleasure's temple.
Round about were hung The glorious features of the bards who sung In other ages- cold and sacred busts Smiled at each other.
Happy he who trusts To clear Futurity his darling fame!
Then there were fauns and satyrs taking aim At swelling apples with a frisky leap And reaching fingers, 'mid a luscious heap Of vine-leaves.
Then there rose to view a fane Of liny marble, and thereto a train Of nymphs approaching fairly o'er the sward: One, loveliest, holding her white hand toward The dazzling sun-rise: two sisters sweet Bending their graceful figures till they meet Over the trippings of a little child: And some are hearing, eagerly, the wild Thrilling liquidity of dewy piping.
See, in another picture, nymphs are wiping Cherishingly Diana's timorous limbs;- A fold of lawny mantle dabbling swims At the bath's edge, and keeps a gentle motion With the subsiding crystal: as when ocean Heaves calmly its broad swelling smoothness o'er Its rocky marge, and balances once more The patient weeds; that now unshent by foam Feel all about their undulating home.
Sappho's meek head was there half smiling down At nothing; just as though the earnest frown Of over thinking had that moment gone From off her brow, and left her all alone.
Great Alfred's too, with anxious, pitying eyes, As if he always listened to the sighs Of the goaded world; and Kosciusko's worn By horrid suffrance- mightily forlorn.
Petrarch, outstepping from the shady green, Starts at the sight of Laura; nor can wean His eyes from her sweet face.
Most happy they!
For over them was seen a free display Of out-spread wings, and from between them shone The face of Poesy: from off her throne She overlook'd things that I scarce could tell.
The very sense of where I was might well Keep Sleep aloof: but more than that there came Thought after thought to nourish up the flame Within my breast; so that the morning light Surprised me even from a sleepless night; And up I rose refresh'd, and glad, and gay, Resolving to begin that very day These lines; and howsoever they be done, I leave them as a father does his son.
A SONG ABOUT MYSELF I.
There was a naughty boy, A naughty boy was he, He would not stop at home, He could not quiet be- He took In his knapsack A book Full of vowels And a shirt With some towels, A slight cap For night cap, A hair brush, Comb ditto, New stockings For old ones Would split O!
This knapsack Tight at's back He rivetted close And followed his nose To the north, To the north, And follow'd his nose To the north.
There was a naughty boy And a naughty boy was he, For nothing would he do But scribble poetry- He took An ink stand In his hand And a pen Big as ten In the other, And away In a pother He ran To the mountains And fountains And ghostes And postes And witches And ditches And wrote In his coat When the weather Was cool, Fear of gout, And without When the weather Was warm- Och the charm When we choose To follow one's nose To the north, To the north, To follow one's nose To the north!
There was a naughty boy And a naughty boy was he, He kept little fishes In washing tubs three In spite Of the might Of the maid Nor afraid Of his Granny-good- He often would Hurly burly Get up early And go By hook or crook To the brook And bring home Miller's thumb, Tittlebat Not over fat, Minnows small As the stall Of a glove, Not above The size Of a nice Little baby's Little fingers- O he made 'Twas his trade Of fish a pretty kettle A kettle- A kettle Of fish a pretty kettle A kettle!
There was a naughty boy, And a naughty boy was he, He ran away to Scotland The people for to see- There he found That the ground Was as hard, That a yard Was as long, That a song Was as merry, That a cherry Was as red, That lead Was as weighty, That fourscore Was as eighty, That a door Was as wooden As in England- So he stood in his shoes And he wonder'd, He wonder'd, He stood in his Shoes and he wonder'd.
STANZAS ("IN DREAR-NIGHTED DECEMBER") STANZAS I.
In drear-nighted December, Too happy, happy tree, Thy branches ne'er remember Their green felicity: The north cannot undo them, With a sleety whistle through them; Nor frozen thawings glue them From budding at the prime.
In drear-nighted December, Too happy, happy brook, Thy bubblings ne'er remember Apollo's summer look; But with a sweet forgetting, They stay their crystal fretting, Never, never petting About the frozen time.
Ah!
would 'twere so with many A gentle girl and boy!
But were there ever any Writh'd not of passed joy?
The feel of not to feel it, When there is none to heal it, Nor numbed sense to steel it, Was never said in rhyme.
TO AILSA ROCK Hearken, thou craggy ocean pyramid!
Give answer from thy voice, the sea-fowls' screams!
When were thy shoulders mantled in huge streams?
When from the sun was thy broad forehead hid?
How long is't since the mighty Power bid Thee heave to airy sleep from fathom dreams?
Sleep in the lap of thunder or sunbeams, Or when grey clouds are thy cold coverlid?
Thou answer'st not, for thou art dead asleep; Thy life is but two dead eternities- The last in air, the former in the deep; First with the whales, last with the eagle-skies- Drown'd wast thou till an earthquake made thee steep, Another cannot wake thy giant size.
TO HOMER Standing aloof in giant ignorance, Of thee I hear and of the Cyclades, As one who sits ashore and longs perchance To visit dolphin-coral in deep seas.
So thou wast blind!- but then the veil was rent, For Jove uncurtain'd Heaven to let thee live, And Neptune made for thee a spumy tent, And Pan made sing for thee his forest-hive; Aye, on the shores of darkness there is light, And precipices show untrodden green; There is a budding morrow in midnight; There is a triple sight in blindness keen; Such seeing hadst thou as it once befel To Dian, Queen of Earth, and Heaven, and Hell.
TO ONE WHO HAS BEEN LONG IN CITY PENT To one who has been long in city pent, 'Tis very sweet to look into the fair And open face of heaven,- to breathe a prayer Full in the smile of the blue firmament.
Who is more happy, when, with heart's content, Fatigued he sinks into some pleasant lair Of wavy grass, and reads a debonair And gentle tale of love and languishment?
Returning home at evening, with an ear Catching the notes of Philomel,- an eye Watching the sailing cloudlet's bright career, He mourns that day so soon has glided by: E'en like the passage of an angel's tear That falls through the clear ether silently.
TO SLEEP O soft embalmer of the still midnight, Shutting with careful fingers and benign Our gloom-pleas'd eyes, embower'd from the light, Enshaded in forgetfulness divine: O soothest Sleep!
if so it please thee, close In midst of this thine hymn my willing eyes, Or wait the amen ere thy poppy throws Around my bed its lulling charities.
Then save me, or the passed day will shine Upon my pillow, breeding many woes; Save me from curious conscience, that still lords Its strength for darkness, burrowing like a mole; Turn the key deftly in the oiled wards, And seal the hushed casket of my soul.
TO- ("WHAT CAN I DO TO DRIVE AWAY") What can I do to drive away Remembrance from my eyes?
for they have seen, Aye, an hour ago, my brilliant Queen!
Touch has a memory.
O say, love, say, What can I do to kill it and be free In my old liberty?
When every fair one that I saw was fair Enough to catch me in but half a snare, Not keep me there: When, howe'er poor or particolour'd things, My muse had wings, And ever ready was to take her course Whither I bent her force, Unintellectual, yet divine to me;- Divine, I say!- What sea-bird o'er the sea Is a philosopher the while he goes Winging along where the great water throes?
How shall I do To get anew Those moulted feathers, and so mount once more Above, above The reach of fluttering Love, And make him cower lowly while I soar?
Shall I gulp wine?
No, that is vulgarism, A heresy and schism, Foisted into the canon law of love;- No,- wine is only sweet to happy men; More dismal cares Seize on me unawares,- Where shall I learn to get my peace again?
To banish thoughts of that most hateful land, Dungeoner of my friends, that wicked strand Where they were wreck'd and live a wrecked life; That monstrous region, whose dull rivers pour Ever from their sordid urns unto the shore, Unown'd of any weedy-haired gods; Whose winds, all zephyrless, hold scourging rods, Iced in the great lakes, to afflict mankind; Whose rank-grown forests, frosted, black, and blind, Would fright a Dryad; whose harsh herbag'd meads Make lean and lank the starv'd ox while he feeds; There flowers have no scent, birds no sweet song, And great unerring Nature once seems wrong.
O, for some sunny spell To dissipate the shadows of this hell!
Say they are gone,- with the new dawning light Steps forth my lady bright!
O, let me once more rest My soul upon that dazzling breast!
Let once again these aching arms be plac'd, The tender gaolers of thy waist!
And let me feel that warm breath here and there To spread a rapture in my very hair,- O, the sweetness of the pain!
Give me those lips again!
Enough!
Enough!
it is enough for me To dream of thee!
TRANSLATED FROM RONSARD Nature withheld Cassandra in the skies For more adornment a full thousand years; She took their cream of Beauty's fairest dyes, And shap'd and tinted her above all Peers: Meanwhile Love kept her dearly with his wings, And underneath their shadow fill'd her eyes With such a richness that the cloudy Kings Of high Olympus utter'd slavish sighs.
When from the Heavens I saw her first descend My heart took fire, and only burning pains They were my pleasures- they my Life's sad end; Love pour'd her beauty into my warm veins...
WHEN I HAVE FEARS THAT I MAY CEASE TO BE When I have fears that I may cease to be Before my pen has glean'd my teeming brain, Before high-piled books in charact'ry Hold like rich garners the full ripen'd grain; When I behold upon the night's starr'd face Huge cloudy symbols of a high romance, And think that I may never live to trace Their shadows with the magic hand of chance; And when I feel, fair creature of an hour, That I shall never look upon thee more, Never have relish in the faery power Of unreflecting love;- then on the shore Of the wide world I stand alone, and think Till love and fame to nothingness do sink.
WHY DID I LAUGH TO-NIGHT?
NO VOICE WILL TELL Why did I laugh to-night?
No voice will tell: No God, no Demon of severe response, Deigns to reply from Heaven or from Hell.
Then to my human heart I turn at once.
Heart!
Thou and I are here sad and alone; I say, why did I laugh!
O mortal pain!
O Darkness!
Darkness!
ever must I moan, To question Heaven and Hell and Heart in vain.
Why did I laugh?
I know this Being's lease, My fancy to its utmost blisses spreads; Yet would I on this very midnight cease, And the world's gaudy ensigns see in shreds.
Verse, Fame, and Beauty are intense indeed, But Death intenser- Death is Life's high meed.
